<?xml version="1.0" encoding="iso-8859-1" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Brittany &amp; Its Byways</title>
      <author><name reg="Bury Palliser, Fanny">Fanny Bury Palliser</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="02">
        Edition 02
      </edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date value="2007-11-09">November 9, 2007</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">22700</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
  <sourceDesc><p>Bibliothèque Nationale de France/Gallica</p>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
    <classDecl>
      <taxonomy id="lc">
        <bibl>
          <title>Library of Congress Classification</title>
        </bibl>
      </taxonomy>
    </classDecl>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
    </langUsage>
    <textClass>
      <classCode scheme="lc">PR</classCode>
      <keywords>
        <list>
          <item>Brittany</item>
          <item>Travel</item>
        </list>
      </keywords>
    </textClass>
  </profileDesc>
    <revisionDesc>
    <change>
	    <date value="2007-11-09">>November 9, 2007</date>
      <respStmt><name>Ralf Stephan</name></respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 02</item>
    </change>
    <change>
      <date value="2007-11-09">November 9, 2007</date>
      <respStmt><name>Ralf Stephan and The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by the Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF/Gallica) at http://gallica.bnf.fr)</name></respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 01</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>
<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .right           { margin-left: 16 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .small           { margin-left: 2 }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
    .hsmallcaps      { } <!-- FIXME PDF { font-variant: small-caps } -->
    figure           { text-align: center }
    .w100            { }
    .w75             { }
    .w66             { }
    .w50             { }
    .w25             { }
    @media pdf {
      .w100            { width: 100% }
      .w75             { width: 75% }
      .w66             { width: 66% }
      .w50             { width: 50% }
      .w25             { width: 25% }
      }
  </pgStyleSheet>
  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>&nbsp;&nbsp;</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
  <pgCharMap formats="pdf">
    <char id="U0x0101">
      <charName>amacron</charName>
      <desc>A WITH MACRON</desc>
      <mapping>[=a]</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x0113">
      <charName>emacron</charName>
      <desc>E WITH MACRON</desc>
      <mapping>[=e]</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x012B">
      <charName>imacron</charName>
      <desc>I WITH MACRON</desc>
      <mapping>[=i]</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>
<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>

    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: right">
      <divGen type="titlepage" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="I"/><anchor id="PgI"/>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">BRITTANY &amp; ITS BYWAYS</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center; smallcaps">some account of<lb/>
      its inhabitants and its antiquities;<lb/>
              during a residence in that country.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">BY MRS. BURY PALLISER</p>
      <pgIf output="txt">
      <then><p>[Illustration: Vignette: St. Michael's Mount]</p></then>
      <else><p><figure rend="text-align: center; w50" url="images/image00.jpg">
      <figDesc></figDesc>
   </figure></p></else></pgIf>
      <p rend="text-align: center; smallcaps">with numerous illustrations</p>
      <milestone unit="tb" rend="rule: 25%" />
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">London</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">1869</p>
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: right">
      <index index="pdf" />
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>

  <body>
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="III"/><anchor id="PgIII"/>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head rend="hsmallcaps">Contents.</head>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="rule: 20%" />


<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Cherbourg</hi>&mdash;Mont du Roule&mdash;Visit of Queen Victoria&mdash;Harbour,
<ref target="Pg001">1</ref>&mdash;Breakwater&mdash;Dock-Yard, <ref target="Pg002">2</ref>&mdash;Chantereyne&mdash;Hôpital
de la Marine, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>&mdash;Castle&mdash;Statue of Napoleon I.&mdash;Library&mdash;Church
of La Trinité, <ref target="Pg004">4</ref>&mdash;Environs&mdash;Octeville,
<ref target="Pg005">5</ref>&mdash;Lace-school of the S&oelig;urs de la Providence, <ref target="Pg011">11</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Querqueville</hi>&mdash;Church of St. Germain, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>&mdash;Château of the
Comte de Tocqueville, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Tourlaville</hi>&mdash;Château, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref>&mdash;Crêpes, <ref target="Pg011">11</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Martinvast</hi>&mdash;Château, <ref target="Pg012">12</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Bricquebec</hi>&mdash;Castle&mdash;History, <ref target="Pg012">12</ref>&mdash;Valognes, <ref target="Pg014">14</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">St. Sauveur</hi>-le-Vicomte&mdash;Demesne&mdash;History, <ref target="Pg015">15</ref>&mdash;Castle&mdash;Convent&mdash;Abbey, <ref target="Pg016">16</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Périers</hi>, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref>&mdash;La Haye-du-Puits, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref>&mdash;Abbey of Lessay&mdash;Mode
of Washing&mdash;Inn-signs, <ref target="Pg018">18</ref>&mdash;Church, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Coutances</hi>&mdash;Cathedral&mdash;Churches, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref>&mdash;Fête of St. Fiacre, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Granville</hi>&mdash;Situation&mdash;History&mdash;Church, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref>&mdash;View from the
"Roc"&mdash;Bathing-machines&mdash;Defeat of the Vendean army&mdash;Death
of La Rochejacquelin, <ref target="Pg022">22</ref>&mdash;Costume of the Women&mdash;Environs&mdash;St.
Pair, <ref target="Pg023">23</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Avranches</hi>&mdash;Extensive View&mdash;Scene of Absolution of Henry II.&mdash;Cemetery,
<ref target="Pg024">24</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Pontorson</hi>&mdash;Story of the Lady Typhaine, <ref target="Pg024">24</ref>&mdash;Government by
Du Guesclin&mdash;Mont St. Michel, <ref target="Pg025">25</ref>&mdash;Chapel of St. Aubert&mdash;Visits
of English kings&mdash;Pilgrimages of Kings of France, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref>&mdash;Convent
of "La Merveille," <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>&mdash;Isle of La Tombeleine&mdash;Prison,
<ref target="Pg028">28</ref>&mdash;The Iron Cage, <ref target="Pg029">29</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Dol-de-Bretagne</hi>&mdash;Street Architecture, <ref target="Pg030">30</ref>&mdash;Cathedral, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>&mdash;Tomb
of Bishop James&mdash;Chapel of St. Samson, <ref target="Pg032">32</ref>&mdash;Monks,
<ref target="Pg033">33</ref>&mdash;Dyke, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref>&mdash;Menhir, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref>&mdash;Château of Combourg, <ref target="Pg036">36</ref>&mdash;Chateaubriand,
<ref target="Pg037">37</ref>.</p>

<pb n="IV"/><anchor id="PgIV"/>
<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Cancale</hi>&mdash;Oysters, <ref target="Pg037">37</ref>&mdash;Wretched public vehicles, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref>&mdash;Bay, <ref target="Pg039">39</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">St. Malo</hi>&mdash;Situation, <ref target="Pg039">39</ref>&mdash;Sea-wall, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref>&mdash;Tomb of Chateaubriand&mdash;Memorials
of him, <ref target="Pg041">41</ref>&mdash;Watch-dogs, <ref target="Pg042">42</ref>&mdash;Castle&mdash;History,
<ref target="Pg043">43</ref>&mdash;<hi rend="smallcaps">Dinard</hi>, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Dinan</hi>&mdash;Ascent of the Rance&mdash;Statue of Du Guesclin, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref>&mdash;Siege
of 1359&mdash;Duel of Du Guesclin and Thomas of Cantorbéry,
<ref target="Pg045">45</ref>&mdash;Castle of Montfilant&mdash;Story of Gilles de Bretagne,
<ref target="Pg046">46</ref>&mdash;Lunatic Asylum&mdash;Castle of Dinan, <ref target="Pg050">50</ref>&mdash;Church of
St. Sauveur, <ref target="Pg051">51</ref>&mdash;Museum, <ref target="Pg052">52</ref>&mdash;Environs&mdash;Château of La
Bellière, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref>&mdash;Château of La Garaye&mdash;Count Claude de la
Garaye and his Wife, <ref target="Pg057">57</ref>&mdash;Jugon, <ref target="Pg061">61</ref>&mdash;Castle of La Hunaudaye,
<ref target="Pg062">62</ref>&mdash;Legend of La Hunaudaye, <ref target="Pg063">63</ref>&mdash;Forest of La
Hunaudaye&mdash;The Chouan War, <ref target="Pg066">66</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Lamballe</hi>&mdash;Jeanne la Boiteuse&mdash;War of Succession, <ref target="Pg067">67</ref>&mdash;Temple
of Lanleff, <ref target="Pg068">68</ref>&mdash;Tradition of the blood-spots, <ref target="Pg070">70</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">St. Brieuc</hi>&mdash;Palais de Justice&mdash;Tour de Cesson, <ref target="Pg071">71</ref>&mdash;Church
of Notre Dame&mdash;Review of his army by James II. of England,
<ref target="Pg072">72</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Guingamp</hi>&mdash;Situation&mdash;Fishing in the Trieux&mdash;Sanctuary of
Notre Dame du Bon Secours&mdash;"Frérie blanche," <ref target="Pg072">72</ref>&mdash;Fountain
of Duke Peter&mdash;Women of Guingamp&mdash;Knitting and
spinning&mdash;Ransom for Du Guesclin, <ref target="Pg074">74</ref>&mdash;Chapel of St.
Leonard patron saint of prisoners&mdash;Curious charms against
fever, <ref target="Pg075">75</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Paimpol</hi>&mdash;Château de Boisgelin, <ref target="Pg075">75</ref>&mdash;Abbey of Beauport, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref>&mdash;Situation
of Paimpol&mdash;Suspension-bridge of Lézardrieux, <ref target="Pg080">80</ref>&mdash;Château
of La Roche Jagu, <ref target="Pg081">81</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Pontrieux</hi>&mdash;Castle of La Roche Derrien, <ref target="Pg082">82</ref>&mdash;"War of the two
Jeannes"&mdash;Church of Langoat&mdash;Monument of Ste. Pompée,
<ref target="Pg083">83</ref>&mdash;Burial customs&mdash;Excellence of roads in Brittany, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Kermartin</hi>&mdash;St. Ives, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>&mdash;Inscription at his birthplace&mdash;Interior
of a Breton dwelling, <ref target="Pg086">86</ref>&mdash;Church of Minihy-Tréguier&mdash;Will
of St. Ives, <ref target="Pg087">87</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Tréguier</hi>&mdash;Cathedral&mdash;Burial-place of St. Ives, <ref target="Pg088">88</ref>&mdash;Constable
Clisson, <ref target="Pg089">89</ref>&mdash;Cemetery, <ref target="Pg090">90</ref>&mdash;Skull-boxes, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Lannion</hi>&mdash;Difficulty of the road, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>&mdash;Perros Guirec&mdash;Ploumanach&mdash;Roche
Pendue, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref>&mdash;Situation of Lannion&mdash;Fishery&mdash;Sea-weed
gathering, <ref target="Pg094">94</ref>&mdash;Castle of Touquédec, <ref target="Pg095">95</ref>&mdash;Château
of Kergrist, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref>.</p>

<pb n="V"/><anchor id="PgV"/>
<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Morlaix</hi>&mdash;Situation&mdash;Timbered houses, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref>&mdash;History, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref>&mdash;Breton
characteristics, <ref target="Pg099">99</ref>&mdash;Protestant Missions, <ref target="Pg100">100</ref>&mdash;"Fontaine
des Anglais," <ref target="Pg102">102</ref>&mdash;River Scenery, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">St. Pol de Léon</hi>, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>&mdash;Religious Monuments&mdash;Character of the
Léonnais, <ref target="Pg104">104</ref>&mdash;Church of Notre Dame de Creizker&mdash;Legend of
St. Génévroc, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref>&mdash;Cathedral, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>&mdash;St. Pol and the Dragon,
<ref target="Pg109">109</ref>&mdash;Ursuline Convent&mdash;"Droit de Motte," <ref target="Pg110">110</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Roscoff</hi>&mdash;Contraband trade with England&mdash;Vegetable produce,
<ref target="Pg111">111</ref>&mdash;Historic importance, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref>&mdash;Church&mdash;Island of Batz&mdash;Enormous
old fig-tree, <ref target="Pg113">113</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">St. Thégonnec Station</hi>&mdash;Cabaret&mdash;Church, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref>&mdash;Guimiliau
Church&mdash;Sculptures, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref>&mdash;Calvary, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref>&mdash;Buckwheat, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref>&mdash;Castle
and Church of La Roche Maurice, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Brest</hi>&mdash;Situation, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref>&mdash;Harbour, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>&mdash;Church of the Folgoët&mdash;Legend,
<ref target="Pg120">120</ref>&mdash;Kersanton stone, <ref target="Pg122">122</ref>&mdash;Sculptures in Kersanton
stone, <ref target="Pg123">123</ref>&mdash;The Fool's Well, <ref target="Pg124">124</ref>&mdash;Exterior of Church,
<ref target="Pg125">125</ref>&mdash;Churchyard, <ref target="Pg127">127</ref>&mdash;Monthly Fair of Brest&mdash;Peasants'
Costumes, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Finistère</hi>&mdash;Abbey of St. Mathieu, <ref target="Pg129">129</ref>&mdash;Sea-fights, <ref target="Pg130">130</ref>&mdash;Pont
Launay and Châteaulin, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Quimper</hi>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref>&mdash;Legend of St. Corentin, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref>&mdash;Cathedral, <ref target="Pg139">139</ref>&mdash;National
costume, <ref target="Pg140">140</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Concarneau</hi>, <ref target="Pg142">142</ref>&mdash;Sardine Fishery, <ref target="Pg143">143</ref>&mdash;Aquarium, <ref target="Pg147">147</ref>&mdash;Dolmen
and Rocking-stone of Trégunc&mdash;Château of Rustéphan,
<ref target="Pg149">149</ref>&mdash;Valley of Pontaven, <ref target="Pg150">150</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Quimperlé</hi>&mdash;Fishing, <ref target="Pg151">151</ref>&mdash;Buildings&mdash;Tomb of St. Gurloës,
<ref target="Pg152">152</ref>&mdash;Tomb of John de Montfort&mdash;Ruins of St. Columban,
<ref target="Pg153">153</ref>&mdash;Dirtiness of the Bretons&mdash;Animals and Farm produce&mdash;Butter
Indulgence, <ref target="Pg154">154</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Lorient</hi>&mdash;Bisson and the Pirates, <ref target="Pg155">155</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Hennebont</hi>&mdash;Heroic defence by Jeanne de Flandre, <ref target="Pg156">156</ref>&mdash;Church
of Notre Dame-de-Paradis, <ref target="Pg157">157</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Ste. Anne D'auray</hi>, <ref target="Pg158">158</ref>&mdash;Scala Sancta&mdash;Fête, <ref target="Pg159">159</ref>&mdash;Chartreuse,
<ref target="Pg160">160</ref>&mdash;Battle, <ref target="Pg161">161</ref>&mdash;Deaf and Dumb School, <ref target="Pg164">164</ref>&mdash;Massacre
of Quiberon, <ref target="Pg165">165</ref>&mdash;Champ des Martyrs, <ref target="Pg168">168</ref>&mdash;Celtic
Remains, <ref target="Pg169">169</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Locmariaker</hi>&mdash;Tumulus&mdash;Celtic and other Remains, <ref target="Pg170">170</ref>&mdash;Tumulus
of Gavr' Inis, <ref target="Pg175">175</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Carnac</hi>&mdash;Celtic Remains&mdash;Menhirs of Kermario, <ref target="Pg177">177</ref>&mdash;Legend
of St. Cornély, <ref target="Pg178">178</ref>&mdash;Jade Celts, &amp;c., at Plouharnel, <ref target="Pg180">180</ref>&mdash;Dolmen
of Concorro, <ref target="Pg181">181</ref>.</p>

<pb n="VI"/><anchor id="PgVI"/>
<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Vannes</hi>&mdash;History&mdash;Promenade, <ref target="Pg183">183</ref>&mdash;Cathedral, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref>&mdash;Château
Gaillau&mdash;Tour du Connétable, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>&mdash;Model Village of Korner-hoët,
<ref target="Pg187">187</ref>&mdash;Peninsula of Rhuys, <ref target="Pg188">188</ref>&mdash;Fortress of Sucinio,
<ref target="Pg189">189</ref>&mdash;Abbey of St. Gildas, <ref target="Pg192">192</ref>&mdash;Abelard and the Breton
Monks, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref>&mdash;The Breton "Blue Beard," <ref target="Pg194">194</ref>&mdash;Butte d'Arzon&mdash;Castle
of Elven, <ref target="Pg199">199</ref>&mdash;Growth of Chestnuts, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Ploërmel</hi>, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref>&mdash;Church, <ref target="Pg204">204</ref>&mdash;Tombs, <ref target="Pg205">205</ref>&mdash;Column of the
Thirty, <ref target="Pg206">206</ref>&mdash;Battle of the Thirty, <ref target="Pg207">207</ref>&mdash;Château of Josselin,
<ref target="Pg209">209</ref>&mdash;Church of Josselin, <ref target="Pg213">213</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Montfort-sur-mer</hi>&mdash;Forest of Paimpont&mdash;Fairy tales, <ref target="Pg215">215</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Rennes</hi>, ancient capital of Brittany&mdash;Entry of Henry IV.&mdash;Scenery
of the Loire, <ref target="Pg216">216</ref>&mdash;Castle of Champtoceaux, <ref target="Pg218">218</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Nantes</hi>&mdash;Cathedral, <ref target="Pg221">221</ref>&mdash;Tombs, <ref target="Pg222">222</ref>&mdash;Castle&mdash;Anne of Brittany,
<ref target="Pg223">223</ref>&mdash;Promenades and Boulevards&mdash;Museum, <ref target="Pg227">227</ref>&mdash;Jardin
des Plantes&mdash;Descent of the Loire&mdash;The Noyades, <ref target="Pg228">228</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">St. Nazaire</hi>&mdash;Historical associations, <ref target="Pg230">230</ref>&mdash;Le Croisic,
<ref target="Pg232">232</ref>&mdash;Salt-pans, <ref target="Pg233">233</ref>&mdash;Costume of the Paludiers, <ref target="Pg234">234</ref>&mdash;Saulniers&mdash;Chouan:
origin of the name and of the War, <ref target="Pg241">241</ref>&mdash;Church
of Batz, <ref target="Pg243">243</ref>&mdash;Situation of Le Croisic, <ref target="Pg244">244</ref>&mdash;Chapel of St.
Goustan, <ref target="Pg245">245</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Guérande</hi>&mdash;Church of St Aubin&mdash;Chapel of Notre Dame
Blanche, <ref target="Pg246">246</ref>&mdash;La Roche Bernard, <ref target="Pg247">247</ref>&mdash;Wedding Festivities,
<ref target="Pg248">248</ref>&mdash;National Music&mdash;Female Costume&mdash;Fête de la Vierge
and of the Emperor, <ref target="Pg249">249</ref>&mdash;Scenery of the River Loch, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Belle Isle</hi>&mdash;Le Palais&mdash;M. Trochu's Model Farm, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref>&mdash;Breton
fatalism, <ref target="Pg252">252</ref>&mdash;Grotte du Port Coton, <ref target="Pg255">255</ref>&mdash;Historical associations
of Belle Isle, <ref target="Pg256">256</ref>&mdash;Fishery, <ref target="Pg257">257</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Pont L'abbé</hi>, <ref target="Pg257">257</ref>&mdash;Costumes, <ref target="Pg258">258</ref>&mdash;Church, <ref target="Pg259">259</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Loctudy</hi>&mdash;Romanesque Church, <ref target="Pg261">261</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Torche de Penmarch</hi>, <ref target="Pg262">262</ref>&mdash;Church of St. Guenolé, <ref target="Pg263">263</ref>&mdash;"Le
filet saint"&mdash;Ruins of the old Town, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref>&mdash;Fontenelle
the Leaguer, <ref target="Pg267">267</ref>&mdash;Church of St. Nonna, <ref target="Pg268">268</ref>&mdash;Menhirs at
Kerscaven, <ref target="Pg269">269</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Audierne</hi>&mdash;Lighthouse&mdash;Bathing-machines, <ref target="Pg269">269</ref>&mdash;Town, <ref target="Pg270">270</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Pointe Du Raz</hi>&mdash;Popular superstitions&mdash;Church of St. Collédoc,
<ref target="Pg271">271</ref>&mdash;"Enfer de Plogoff"&mdash;Island of Sein&mdash;Druidesses,
<ref target="Pg272">272</ref>&mdash;Dangerous passage, <ref target="Pg273">273</ref>&mdash;Baie des Trépassés&mdash;Submerged
city of Is, <ref target="Pg274">274</ref>&mdash;Legend of King Gradlon and his
daughter Dahut, <ref target="Pg275">275</ref>.</p>

<pb n="VII"/><anchor id="PgVII"/>
<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Douarnenez</hi>&mdash;Romanesque Church of Pointcroix, <ref target="Pg276">276</ref>&mdash;Chapel
of Notre Dame de Comfort&mdash;Wheel of Sacring-Bells&mdash;Town
of Douarnenez, <ref target="Pg279">279</ref>&mdash;Pardon of Ste. Anne-de-la-Palue, <ref target="Pg280">280</ref>&mdash;Costume,
<ref target="Pg281">281</ref>&mdash;Church of Ste. Anne&mdash;Procession, <ref target="Pg282">282</ref>&mdash;Holy
Well of Ste. Anne, <ref target="Pg285">285</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Scaër</hi>&mdash;Old Customs and Superstitions, <ref target="Pg285">285</ref>&mdash;Wrestling&mdash;"Pierres
de Croix," <ref target="Pg286">286</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Le Faouét</hi>&mdash;Chapel of St. Barbe, <ref target="Pg287">287</ref>&mdash;Wedding ceremonies
and amusements, <ref target="Pg288">288</ref>&mdash;Fishing, <ref target="Pg289">289</ref>&mdash;Old Breton superstitious
still prevalent&mdash;Lavandières de la Nuit, <ref target="Pg290">290</ref>&mdash;Church of
St. Fiacre&mdash;Elaborately carved Rood-screen, <ref target="Pg293">293</ref>&mdash;Painted
glass&mdash;Ruined Castle of Poncallec&mdash;Plot of Cellamare, <ref target="Pg294">294</ref>&mdash;Montagnes
Noires, <ref target="Pg296">296</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Carhaix</hi>&mdash;Situation, <ref target="Pg297">297</ref>&mdash;Statue of La Tour d'Auvergne, <ref target="Pg298">298</ref>&mdash;Fair
and Market&mdash;Church of St. Tremeur&mdash;Skull-boxes, <ref target="Pg299">299</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Huelgoat</hi>, <ref target="Pg300">300</ref>&mdash;Lead-mines, <ref target="Pg301">301</ref>&mdash;Cascade of St. Herbot&mdash;Chapel
of St. Herbot, <ref target="Pg303">303</ref>&mdash;His tomb, <ref target="Pg304">304</ref>&mdash;Patron of cattle&mdash;Offerings
of horsehair and cows' tails, <ref target="Pg304">304</ref>&mdash;Homeward
journey, <ref target="Pg307">307</ref>.</p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Useful Dates</hi> in the History of Brittany           <ref target="Pg309">309</ref></p>

<p><hi rend="smallcaps">Chronological Table</hi> of the Dukes of Brittany      <ref target="Pg310">310</ref></p>
</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
   <index index="pdf" />
   <index index="toc" />
   <head rend="hsmallcaps">List of Illustrations.</head>

   <lg rend="indent"> 
<l><hi rend="smallcaps">Vignette</hi>&mdash;St. Michael's Mount, <ref target="PgI">Title-page</ref>.</l>
<l>1. Querqueville Church, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref></l>
<l>2. Plan of Querqueville Church, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref></l>
<l>3. Château of Tourlaville, <ref target="Pg009">9</ref></l>
<l>4. Castle of Bricquebec, <ref target="Pg013">13</ref></l>
<l>5. Badge of the S&oelig;urs de la Miséricorde, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref></l>
<l>6. Coutances Cathedral, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref></l>
<l>7. Pilaster and Cornice from Tomb of Bp. James in Cathedral of Dol, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref></l>
<l>8. Front of the Tomb, <ref target="Pg032">32</ref></l>
<l>9. Menhir, near Dol, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref></l>
<l>10. Château of Combourg, <ref target="Pg037">37</ref></l>
<l>11. Peasant Girl of Cancale, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref></l>
<l>12. St. Malo and Chateaubriand's Tomb, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref></l>
<l>13. Effigy of Jean de Beaumanoir, <ref target="Pg052">52</ref></l>
<l>14. Château of La Bellière, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref></l>
<l>15. Chimney, Château of La Bellière, <ref target="Pg056">56</ref></l>
<l>16. Château of La Garaye, <ref target="Pg060">60</ref></l>
<l>17. Section of Lanleff Church, <ref target="Pg069">69</ref></l>
<l>18. Plan of Lanleff Church, <ref target="Pg070">70</ref></l>
<l>19. Fountain of Duke Peter, <ref target="Pg073">73</ref></l>
<l>20. Abbey of Beauport, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref></l>
<l>21. Skull-box, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref></l>
<l>22. The <corr sic="Creisker">Creizker</corr>, <ref target="Pg107">107</ref></l>
<l>23. Calvary, Guimiliau, <ref target="Pg116">116</ref></l>
<l>24. The Fool's Well, Folgoët, <ref target="Pg124">124</ref></l>
<l>25. Abbey of St. Mathieu, <ref target="Pg131">131</ref></l>
<l>26. Peasant Girl of Ouëssant, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref></l>
<l>27. Peasant Girl, Châteaulin, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref></l>
<l>28. Begger, Quimper, <ref target="Pg141">141</ref></l>
<l>29. Concarneau, with Sardine Boats, <ref target="Pg143">143</ref></l>
<l>30. Dolmen, Trégunc, <ref target="Pg146">146</ref></l>
<l>31. Rocking-Stone, Trégunc, <ref target="Pg148">148</ref></l>
<l>32. Château of Rustéphan, <ref target="Pg150">150</ref></l>
<l>33. Scala Sancta, Ste. Anne d'Auray, <ref target="Pg159">159</ref></l>
<l>34. Champ des Martyrs, Auray, <ref target="Pg169">169</ref></l>
<l>35. Sculptured Stone, Locmariaker, <ref target="Pg171">171</ref></l>
<l>36. Hatchet-shaped Sculpture, Locmariaker, <ref target="Pg173">173</ref></l>
<l>37. Entrance to Tumulus of Gavr' Inis, <ref target="Pg175">175</ref></l>
<l>38, 39. Sculptured Stones, Gavr' Inis, <ref target="Pg176">176</ref></l>
<l>40. Dolmen of Corcorro, <ref target="Pg182">182</ref></l>
<l>41. Castle of Elven, <ref target="Pg200">200</ref></l>
<l>42. Column of the Thirty, <ref target="Pg206">206</ref></l>
<l>43. Château of Josselin, <ref target="Pg212">212</ref></l>
<l>44. Salt-Pans, with Le Croisic in the distance, <ref target="Pg235">235</ref></l>
<l>45. Paludier of the Bourg de Bate in his working dress, <ref target="Pg237">237</ref></l>
<l>46. Paludier of the Bourg de Bate in his wedding dress, <ref target="Pg239">239</ref></l>
<l>47. La Roche Bernard, <ref target="Pg247">247</ref></l>
<l>48. Entrance to Le Palais, Belle Isle, <ref target="Pg253">253</ref></l>
<l>49. Device of Fouquet, <ref target="Pg257">257</ref></l>
<l>50. Peasant Girl, Pont l'Abbé, <ref target="Pg258">258</ref></l>
<l>51. Apse of the Church, Loctudy, <ref target="Pg260">260</ref></l>
<l>52. Torche of Penmarch, <ref target="Pg262">262</ref></l>
<l>53. Ship sculptured on the walls, Church of St. Guenolé, Penmarch, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref></l>
<l>54. Church of Guenolé, Penmarch, <ref target="Pg265">265</ref></l>
<l>55. Fleur-de-lisé Window, Church of St. Nonna, Penmarch, <ref target="Pg269">269</ref></l>
<l>56. Pointe du Raz, <ref target="Pg270">270</ref></l>
<l>57. Front of the Church at Pont Croix, <ref target="Pg277">277</ref></l>
<l>58. Wheel of Sacring Bells, Notre Dame-de-Comfort, near Douarnenez, <ref target="Pg279">279</ref></l>
<l>59. Costume of a Finistère Bride, <ref target="Pg281">281</ref></l>
<l>60. Well of Ste. Anne-la-Palue, <ref target="Pg284">284</ref></l>
<l>61. Cross Stones, <ref target="Pg286">286</ref></l>
<l>62. Rood-screen or Jubé, St. Fiacre, <ref target="Pg291">291</ref></l>
<l>63. Carved Stalls, St. Herbot, <ref target="Pg304">304</ref></l>
<l>64. Carved Stalls, St. Herbot, <ref target="Pg305">305</ref></l>
</lg>
</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="001"/><anchor id="Pg001"/>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head rend="hsmallcaps">Britanny and Its Byways.</head>
<p>A fair wind conveyed us in six hours from Poole
to Cherbourg. It was dusk when we entered the
harbour, and so we had no opportunity of seeing
its beauty until the following morning, when we
ascended a height behind the town, called the Mont
du Roule. It is reached either on foot or by carriage,
the Emperor having ordered a road to be
made up to the fort which crowns the heights, on the
occasion of the visit to Cherbourg, in 1858, of her
Majesty Queen Victoria. Some 1500 men were
immediately set to work, and, in a few days, an
easy carriage-road was finished, up which the Emperor
drove the Queen at his usual rapid pace.
The view from the fort is lovely, commanding the
whole line of the northern point of the Cotentin,
from the low promontory of Cape de la Hogue to
Barfleur. The water of the harbour, owing to its
great depth, is of the most intense blue, which we
quite agreed with the guardian of the fort in
likening to that of the Bay of Naples. Across its
entrance stretches, for two miles, the long line of
the breakwater, and within were anchored the fleet
of our yacht squadron, which the day before had
<pb n="002"/><anchor id="Pg002"/>
run a race between Poole and Cherbourg. We
took a boat to visit the breakwater. It is commanded
at each end by a fort, with another in the
centre, where the provisions are kept. In stormy
weather the sea washes over the breakwater, and
sometimes for days prevents all communication
between the forts, and the supplies consequently are
stopped. Boys offered us for sale the silvery shells
of the Venus' ear, which inhabits the rocks of the
breakwater. We afterwards saw them in the fish-market
exposed for sale, and, on expressing some
curiosity as to how they were eaten, the landlord
had a dish prepared for us. These fish resemble
the scallop in taste, but are very tough, and require
a great deal of beating with a wooden mallet to
make them tender enough to eat. They are called
"ormer," or "gofish." The table d'hôte was very
plentifully supplied with fish, and here, as throughout
Normandy and Brittany, cider, the customary
beverage of the country, was always placed upon
the table. It varies very much in quality in different
districts; that of Bayeux is most esteemed.</p>
<p>The next morning we set out for the dockyard.
To obtain admission, it first requires a letter from
the English Consul, who lives in a charming spot
overlooking the sea, at the foot of the Montagne
du Roule. Furnished with this, we repaired to the
Préfet Maritime, who gave us an order to be presented
<pb n="003"/><anchor id="Pg003"/>
at the dockyard gate, where it was countersigned,
and a guide appointed to show us over the
establishment. We made the tour round all the
basins and workshops, and saw the canot impérial
used by the Emperor on the visit of our Queen,&mdash;a
most elegant boat, beautifully carved with marine
subjects. The model of a Roman trireme, or galley,
is in one of the basins, and in the little museum,
or Salle des Modèles, are the two flagstones that
covered the grave of Napoleon, and were deposited
here by the Prince de Joinville, when he returned
with the Emperor's remains from St. Helena. The
dockyard partly stands on a spot called Chantereyne.
The Empress Matilda, fleeing from Stephen, was
overtaken by a tempest when making for Cherbourg,
and vowed, if her life were spared, to build a church.
The ship was in jeopardy, but the pilot cheered
her spirits, and, when gaining the port, exclaimed,
"Chantes Reine! we are safe in harbour." The
place where she landed has always retained the
name; and here the Empress, in fulfilment of her
vow, founded an abbey, which was destroyed in the
Revolution. The habitations of the nuns is the
present provisional Hôpital de la Marine; a new one,
containing above a thousand beds, being in course
of construction, and a modern church, called Eglise
du V&oelig;u, has been erected in another part of the
town in place of that of the Empress Matilda.</p>
<pb n="004"/><anchor id="Pg004"/>
<p>Henry II. held his court in the castle with his
empress-mother in great splendour; it had formerly
been tenanted by Duke William of Normandy before
his invasion of England, and, within its enclosure,
he built a church also, in consequence of a
vow made during a serious illness. There are few
objects of interest in the town of Cherbourg. The
women all wear the large Normandy cap. In the
Place d'Armes is a bronze equestrian statue of the
Emperor Napoleon I., and on the pedestal is inscribed
"J'avois résolu de renouveler à Cherbourg
les merveilles de l'Egypte."  In the Library is a
curiously sculptured chimney-piece of the fifteenth
century, coloured and gilt, removed from a room of
the abbey. The principal church, La Trinité, is a
strange jumble of architecture. There is some beautiful
tracery in the windows, and a fine boss (clef pendante)
in the south porch, now restored. On a board
in the church is an inscription, setting forth it was
built in consequence of a "v&oelig;u solennel des habitans
de Cherbourg en 1450 de la délivrance de la domination
étrangère"&mdash;that is, from the English, whose defeat
the same year at Formigny, by the Constable de
Richemont, expelled them for ever from Normandy.</p>
<p>There is much to see in the environs of Cherbourg,
which makes it a good central point for
excursions. We drove by the fort of Octeville,
where a magnificent panoramic view is obtained,
<pb n="005"/><anchor id="Pg005"/>
equalling in extent that from the Mont du Roule.
A fisherman, who was standing by, told us the
names of the numerous forts that bristle in every
direction, and related to us the legend of the monk
of Saire, who, having received the rent due to his
father for some land, appropriated the money to his
own use, and, on the tenant declaring he had paid
the sum, adjured the evil one to carry him off, if he
had ever received the money. The words were no
sooner uttered than there came a flash of lightning,
and the monk vanished: but he still appears in the
roads of Cherbourg floating on the sea; when he sees
a sailor, he cries "Save me, save me! I am about
to sink!" but the hapless being who approaches to
assist him is immediately dragged into the water, a
peal of infernal laughter is heard, and the luckless
mariner disappears for ever. We asked our guide if
he believed in the phantom monk, but he was silent.</p>
   <pgIf output="txt">
   <then>
   <p>[Illustration: 1. Querqueville Church.]</p>
   </then>
   <else>
   <p>
   <figure rend="w50" url="images/image01.jpg">
   <head>1. Querqueville Church.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
   </figure>
   </p>
   </else>
   </pgIf>
<p>From Octeville we proceeded to Querqueville,
where, in the same churchyard as the parochial
church, stands a little church, named after St. Germain,
the first apostle of the Cotentin, who, in the
fifth century, landed from England on the coast of
La Hogue, and preached Christianity in this district
and the valley traversed by the river Saire, which
falls into the sea near St. Vaast-la-Hogue. This
tiny church, for it measures only 34 feet by 24, and
is 11 feet high, is by some supposed to have been a
<pb n="006"/><anchor id="Pg006"/>
temple of the Gauls converted into a Christian place
of worship; the nave and tower having been added to
the old temple, which consists of a triple apse forming
a regular trefoil, each of
which has a domed top.
We drove on to Nacqueville,
the château of Comte
Hippolyte de Tocqueville.
The park is prettily laid
out, a stream of water runs
in front of the house, and
a row of blue hydrangeas
blazed forth in great beauty, with the relief of a
background of dark firs. Time prevented us from
pursuing our excursion further west, to see the
famed cliffs of Jobourg.</p>
<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 2. Plan of Querqueville Church.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w25" url="images/image02.jpg">
    <head>2. Plan of <lb />Querqueville Church.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<pb n="007"/><anchor id="Pg007"/>

<p>To the east of Cherbourg a high road leads to
Barfleur and the lighthouse of Gatteville, between
which and the Isle of Wight is the narrowest point
of the English Channel, passing by Saint-Pierre-Eglise,
near which is the château of the late Alexis de
Tocqueville, author of 'Democracy in America;' but
we did not get further on the road than Tourlaville,
the ancient château of the Ravalet family, upon
whom tradition has heaped every crime imaginable.
One seigneur entered the church with his hounds
and stabbed the priest at the altar, because he refused
to administer to him the consecrated element; another
hanged some of his vassals, because they did
not grind their corn at the seignorial mill, for
"haute or basse justice" was then among the nobles'
rights. Marguerite, a daughter of this ancient house,
expiated, with her brother, their offences upon the
scaffold at Paris. Every effort was made to spare
their lives; but the King, or rather Queen Margot,
was inexorable. The château of Tourlaville is beautifully
situated; it is in the style of the Renaissance,
with an angular tower, which <corr sic="recals">recalls</corr> that of Heidelberg
Castle. The ground-floor consists of two large
unfurnished rooms, and a staircase, with iron railing,
leads to the story above. In one room hangs the
portrait of a lady châteleine, in the costume of the
period of Louis XIII., with the château of Tourlaville
in the distance. On her left are eight Cupids
<pb n="008"/><anchor id="Pg008"/>
with bandages over their eyes, one in advance of the
others is not blinded. From the lady's mouth is
a label, with the inscription "Un (seul) me suffit."
This is said to be the portrait of the Lady Marguerite,
but the costume is of a later date. In one
of the rooms is a chimney-piece covered with a
variety of amatory devices and mottoes:&mdash;a Cupid
blinded, holding a lighted torch, motto "Ce qui me
donne la vie me cause la mort." Again, another
Cupid with eyes bandaged, pouring water out of a
vase to cool a flaming heart he holds in his hand,
motto "Sa froideur me glace les veines et son ardeur
brûle mon c&oelig;ur." Six winged hearts flying at the
approach of Cupid, but which are reached by his
darts, "Même en fuyant l'on est pris." Further is
a sentiment in verse:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Plusieurs sont atteints de ce feu,</q></l>
<l><q rend="post">Mais il ne s'en guérit que fort peu.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>Again,&mdash;</p>

<p rend="display"><q>Ces deux n'en font qu'un.</q></p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 3. Château of Tourlaville.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image03.jpg">
    <head>3. Château of Tourlaville.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>


<p>A river in the foreground, in the distance a setting
sun, motto "Ainsi puissai-je mourir." This assemblage
of devices and mottoes is not applicable to
any particular individual, but may be supposed to
be merely an expression of the taste of the time.
They are of the seventeenth century, when the
Ravalet had been succeeded by the Franquetot
family, who have since taken the name of Coigny.
<pb n="009"/><anchor id="Pg009"/>
<pb n="010"/><anchor id="Pg010"/>
<pb n="011"/><anchor id="Pg011"/>
Their arms, with several others, are in the little
boudoir in one of the towers, called the Blue Chamber.
Its walls are distempered blue, and the coverlet
and hangings of the bed, with all the decorations of
the room, are of the same colour. Having admired
the lovely view from the "Tour des quatre vents,"
we descended to the kitchen of the farmer who rents
the house, which now belongs to the Tocqueville
family. His wife was busily employed in making
"crêpes," a favourite kind of cake in Normandy
and Brittany. It is made generally of the flour
of the sarrasin or buckwheat, mixed with milk or
water, and spread into a kind of pancake, which is
fried on an iron pan, resembling the Scotch griddle-cakes.
Another variety, called "galette," is made
of the same ingredients, but differs from the crêpe
in its being made three or four times the thickness,
and is therefore not so light. Though generally
made of buckwheat, wheat or oat-flour is sometimes
used; and in the towns, sugar and cinnamon and
vanilla are added, and the simple character of the
crêpe entirely changed under the hands of the confectioner.
The little village of Tourlaville was
famous for its glassworks, until supplanted by those
of Gobain.</p>

<p>On our return to Cherbourg we visited the lace
school of the S&oelig;urs de la Providence, where about
two hundred girls are employed in making black
<pb n="012"/><anchor id="Pg012"/>
lace like that of Bayeux, which has now completely
superseded the Chantilly; the manner of making
both laces is similar. The old Chantilly has completely
died out, and the modern manufacture extends
the whole length of Normandy from Cherbourg
to Bayeux. How the children can keep the
bobbins from entangling is a marvel; there were
as many as five hundred on one pillow. The lace-makers
were chiefly employed in flounces, shawls,
and other large works. These are all made in separate
pieces, and united by the stitch called fine
joining or "raboutissage." A half-shawl or "pointe"
was divided into thirty segments. We passed the
evening at the Etablissement, and next morning left
Cherbourg.</p>

<p>The railway traverses the picturesque and rocky
valley of Quincampoix to Martinvast, whose little
Romanesque church stands close to the station, and
at a short distance is the château of Martinvast,
where its late proprietor, M. du Moncel, established
a model farm. A monument has been erected to
his memory in the church by the commune of
Martinvast.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 4. Castle of Bricquebec.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image04.jpg">
    <head>4. Castle of Bricquebec.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>


<p>At Sottevast we took the omnibus for Bricquebec,
which lies nearly five miles from the station. Its
ruined castle, dating from the end of the fourteenth
century, with its lofty octagonal donjon, nearly a
hundred feet high, standing on a high "motte" or
<pb n="013"/><anchor id="Pg013"/>
artificial mound, has a most imposing appearance.
Bricquebec, the most considerable demesne of the
Cotentins, was taken by King Henry V. from the
Sire d'Estouteville, who had so gallantly defended
Mont St. Michel against him. Henry gave Bricquebec
to William de la Pole, Earl of Suffolk, the ill-fated
favourite of Queen Margaret of Anjou, and
he, on being taken prisoner by the French, sold it,
<pb n="014"/><anchor id="Pg014"/>
to raise the money for his ransom, to Sir Bertie
Entwistle, who fought at Agincourt, and who held
it till the battle of Formigny expelled the English
from Normandy, and Sir Bertie fell at St. Albans in
the Lancastrian cause. The inn, "Hôtel du Vieux
Château," is within the enclosure of the ruins&mdash;a
most dilapidated old place; our dirty ill-furnished
room next to a hayloft, the horses passing through
the house to the stable, and every kind of litter and
rubbish accumulated under the windows. Yet in
the room we occupied had once slept our gracious
Sovereign Queen Victoria. On a placard is inscribed,
"Chambre de la famille royale d'Angleterre,
18 Août 1857;" and below stairs is another, setting
forth, "S. M. la Reine d'Angleterre, le Prince
Albert, les Princesses Royale et Alice, le Prince
Alfred, sont descendus à l'hôtel du Vieux Château le
10 Août 1857." About a mile from Bricquebec is
a Trappist convent; but we were not allowed admission
beyond the parlour, where is sold a quantity of
cutlery, not made&mdash;as we were given to understand
when offered for sale&mdash;by the monks.</p>

<p>Regaining the railroad, we went on to Valognes,
which has been styled the St. Germain of Normandy;
a dull town, with worn-out houses, occupied
by worn-out aristocratic families. The grass grows
in the streets.</p>

<p>Here we left the rail and proceeded to Saint
<pb n="015"/><anchor id="Pg015"/>
Sauveur-le-Vicomte. On entering the town, the
castle is on the right of the road, the Abbey church
on the left. The large demesne of Saint Sauveur-le-Vicomte
passed by marriage into the Harcourt
family, and belonged, in the time of Edward III.,
to Geoffrey d'Harcourt, whose fortress was one of
the most formidable in Normandy. Banished from
France, he went over to England and persuaded
Edward III. to make a descent upon Normandy
instead of Gascony, assuring him he would find rich
towns and fair castles without any means of defence,
and that his people would gain wealth enough to
suffice them for twenty years to come. The King
landed at La Hogue, or Saint Vaast-la-Hogue, as it
is now called, where he knighted the Prince of Wales
and made Warwick and Harcourt marshals of his
army. They advanced in three divisions&mdash;the King
and the Prince in the centre, the two marshals on
the right and left&mdash;ravaging all before them, and
not stopping in their victorious course till the great
victory at Crecy. Harcourt subsequently met a
traitor's fate. A force was sent against him, his army
was routed, and, preferring death to being taken, he
fought most valiantly until he was struck to the
ground by French lances, when some men-at-arms
dispatched him with their swords. He had sold the
reversion of his castle to King Edward III., to whom
it was confirmed by the treaty of Bretigny. Edward
<pb n="016"/><anchor id="Pg016"/>
bestowed the barony upon that pride of English
chivalry, Sir John Chandos, in recompense for his
great services in the wars. The square donjon and
inner gate were built by Chandos. The castle is
well preserved, and is now used as a hospice for
orphans and aged women. The rooms are kept
beautifully clean, and on a tablet in one of the corridors
is written up "Dortoirs restaurés par la munificence
de M. le Comte Georges d'Harcourt en
mémoire de ses illustres ayeux, anciens Seigneurs de
ce château, en 1838."</p>

<p>The Benedictine convent also belonged to the
Harcourts until the revolt of Geoffrey. It is now the
property of the S&oelig;urs de la Miséricorde, who have
rebuilt the fine Abbey church according to its former
model. Originally built in the eleventh century, it
was partly burnt in the fourteenth, and reconstructed
in the fifteenth. The columns and arches of the
nave are of the first period; the form of the church
is a Latin cross, having an apse ornamented with a
double row of lancet windows, richly sculptured.
The sculptures are all executed by an untaught
workman of the place, who died before he had completed
the pulpit. To collect the funds necessary for
the undertaking, the foundress travelled throughout
Europe. Her tomb is in the church. "Julie
Françoise Catherine Postel, née à Barfleur, 1756.
S&oelig;ur Marie Madelaine, Fondatrice et première Superieure
<pb n="017"/><anchor id="Pg017"/>
Générale de l'Institut des Ecoles Chrétiennes
de la Miséricorde, morte en odeur de Sainteté
16 Juillet 1846, à l'Abbaye de
St. Sauveur-le-Vicomte." The
badge of the sisterhood is a
cross inscribed with their
motto "L'obéissance jusqu'à
la mort." Some of the party
made an attempt at fishing
in the little river Douve, but
without success, though rewarded
for their walk by a
pretty view of the apse of the Abbey church, with
its delicately-sculptured lancet windows, from the
opposite side of the river.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 5. L'OBÉISSANCE JUSQU'À LA MORT.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w25" url="images/image05.jpg">
    <head>5. L'OBÉISSANCE <lb />JUSQU'À LA MORT.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>


<p>We hired a private carriage (<hi rend="italic">voiture à volonté</hi>) to
Périers. After passing over a hilly road we crossed
a marsh which extends from Carentan to the sea,
and reached a town called La Haye-du-Puits&mdash;a
singular name derived from the custom in the middle
ages of surrounding the "motte" or enclosure upon
which the donjon was built, with a wooden palisade,
or sometimes with a thick hedge formed of thorns
and branches of trees interlaced: hence La Haye-du-Puits,
La Haye-Pesnel, and others. Here is a Norman
church restored: all the capitals of the columns
are of the same pattern.</p>

<p>The Abbey church at Lessay, where next we
<pb n="018"/><anchor id="Pg018"/>
stopped, is of the twelfth century, and considered,
with Coutances and Périers, to be the finest examples
of Romanesque in the Cotentin. The arches are
round, and all the architecture of the church, which
has been restored, is of the same period. The Abbey
of Lessay had transmarine jurisdiction and the right
of presentation to the Priory of Boxgrove and other
endowments in the diocese of Chichester. The
Abbey house, now inhabited, is a fine modernised
habitation. At Lessay we saw the manner of washing
linen practised in many places throughout Normandy
and Brittany. Being first roughly washed in the
river, the clothes are placed in layers in a large cask,
with a bunghole at the bottom, alternately with
wood-ashes, and on the top is laid a piece of
coarse sacking. Boiling water is poured over the
top, which, as it passes through the linen, absorbs
the soda of the ashes, escaping at the bottom and
carrying away with it all impurities. This process
is repeated several times till the clothes are perfectly
white.</p>

<p>Throughout this part of the country the mistletoe
hangs as the sign of a cabaret; and if cider is sold,
some apples are fastened to the bush. On the road
to Périers we crossed a "lande" or common, where
we met numerous carts carrying sea sand, here used
to mix with the heavy soil as manure.</p>

<p>At Périers we slept at the little inn "La Croix
<pb n="019"/><anchor id="Pg019"/>
Blanche," kept by Madame Casimir, the widow
of a Polish officer, well known for her eccentricity
and good cuisine. The entrance to the apartments
in the inns is generally through the kitchen; in many
the box bedstead (<hi rend="italic">lit clos</hi>) stands in the corner near
the fire, Breton fashion. On a barber's shop we saw
painted up "Içi l'on rajeunit." The church has a
tall spire, and is one of the finest religious edifices in
this part of Normandy&mdash;painted windows, the capitals
of the columns of varied foliage, and fine groined
clustered arches.</p>

<p>We had a most perilous drive to Coutances, the
coachman, "en ribote," drove us at a fearful pace,
and we were thankful when we arrived in safety.
The Norman cathedral is beautiful&mdash;so simple, so
pure, and elegant; its tall towers terminating in spires;
and the chapels being separated by open mullioned
arches, great lightness is given to the interior. The
Bishop of Coutances was officiating at the consecration
of some stones for a new pavement; each flag
was rubbed over and anointed with oil.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 6. Coutances Cathedral.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image06.jpg">
    <head>6. Coutances Cathedral.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>


<p>The church of St. Pierre has a handsome square
tower, pierced gallery, and apse with a double row
of columns. In the church of St. Nicholas we particularly
noticed the fine bosses of the groined arches
in the chancel. The fonts hereabouts have the serpent
with the apple, and the cross carved upon the
<pb n="020"/><anchor id="Pg020"/>
cover. The church was filled with pots of flowers
they were employed in removing, for the day before
had been the Fête of St. Fiacre, the patron of gardeners.
St. Fiacre, or Fiaker, was an Irish monk of
the seventh century, who, according to tradition,
<pb n="021"/><anchor id="Pg021"/>
obtained from the Bishop of Meaux a grant of as
much ground out of the forest as he could dig a
trench round in one day's labour, for the purpose
of making a garden and cultivating vegetables for
travellers. Long time after, the peasants would
show the ditch ten times longer than was expected,
and relate how, when the Irishman took his stick to
trace a line upon the soil, the earth dug itself under
the point of the stick, while the forest trees fell right
and left to save him the trouble of cutting them
down. Outside the town are the remains of an aqueduct,
with ivy-covered arches, said to be the work
of the middle ages. It is a good point of view for
sketching the cathedral, and the public gardens also
command a fine prospect.</p>

<p>The approach to Granville is by a sharp descent.
The town is built at the foot of a rocky promontory,
the streets rising in terraces cut in the rock, on the
top of which are the citadel and the church on the
culminating point. It has been styled a Gibraltar
in miniature. A fort was built here by Lord Scales,
who commanded the English forces in the Cotentin
in the time of Henry VI., and it was taken by
surprise by Estouteville, the hero of Saint Michel.
The church is cruciform in plan, the arms of the
cross being equal. The axis of the nave is inclined
to the left, as we afterwards observed that of the
<corr sic="Creisker">Creizker</corr> at St. Pol de Léon. It has been lately
<pb n="022"/><anchor id="Pg022"/>
restored, and the painted windows are offerings of
the different families of the town. The view from
the top of the "Roc" is very extensive, including
the Chausey islands and Jersey. A steamer runs
twice a week to St. Helier. A deep cutting in the
rocks opens on the beach, where the bathing-machines
are stationed&mdash;curious little canvas huts
carried upon poles, like sedan chairs. The tide here
rises 45 feet. It was to Granville the Vendean
army, commanded by La Rochejacquelin, appointed
generalissimo at twenty-two, marched after their fatal
step of crossing the Loire, expecting to make a junction
with the English; but Granville was vigorously
defended, contrary winds retarded the arrival of the
English fleet, and the retreat from the coast, where
it might have been supported by the English, was
the ruin of the Royalist army. Of the 80,000 who
crossed the Loire sixty days before, only 8000
remained to make their last heroic resistance at
Savenay, which ended the great Vendean war. A
few months after, the hero of this noble army, the
chivalrous Henri de la Rochejacquelin, fell from the
bullet of a soldier whose life he had spared<note place="foot">"Si
je recule, tuez-moi; si j'avance, suivez-moi; si je meurs,
vengez-moi," was his celebrated address to the peasant army.</note>:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display"><lg>
<l><q rend="pre">Lorsqu'en des jours trop malheureux</q></l>
<l>Pâlissait l'astre de la France;</l>
<l>Quand les c&oelig;urs les plus valeureux</l>
<l>Semblaient perdre toute espérance,</l></lg>
<pb n="023"/><anchor id="Pg023"/>
<lg><l>L'antique honneur, la sainte foi,</l>
<l>Brillèrent dans cette contrée;</l>
<l>Mourir pour son Dieu, pour son roi,</l>
<l><q rend="post">Fut le serment de la Vendée.</q></l>
</lg></lg>

<p>The costume of the Granville women is singular.
They wear long black cloaks or mantles, edged with
a frill of the same material, and on their heads a
kind of bandeau or under-cap, turned up at the ears,
surmounted by a white handkerchief, folded square
and placed horizontally upon the head, like the
plinth of a Grecian capital.</p>

<p>We drove to St. Pair, a small watering-place about
two miles from Granville, nicely situated in a little
sandy bay. In the middle of the church is the
monumental tomb of St. Pair and another saint (St.
Gault); their effigies, with mitre and crozier, side
by side.</p>

<p>Next day we had a beautiful drive to Avranches.
A winding road leads up to the town, which is
situated on an elevated plateau, commanding a view
of Brittany on one side and of Normandy on the
other&mdash;a broad expanse of land and sea, the former
extending over the valley of the Sée, with its network
of small streams interlacing each other; Mont
St. Michel appears in the distance. The finest view
is from the Botanic gardens. The cathedral of
Avranches fell at the end of the last century, but a
model of it is preserved in the museum. One stone
<pb n="024"/><anchor id="Pg024"/>
remains, carefully surrounded by massive chains,
with an inscription recording that it was the spot
where Henry II. received absolution for the murder
of Thomas à Becket:&mdash;"Sur cette pierre, içi à la
porte de la cathédrale d'Avranches, après le meurtre
de Thomas Becket, Archévêque de Cantorbéry,
Henri II., roi d'Angleterre, duc de Normandie,
reçut à genoux, des légats du pape, l'absolution apostolique,
le dimanche xxii Mai, 1172." The cemetery
is at the foot of the hill; the tombs are of granite,
with the letters in relief: among them we read many
well-known English names.</p>

<p>At Pontorson we could find no remains of the
castle of Du Guesclin, which was nearly surprised by
the English under a captain named Felton, during
the absence of Du Guesclin, with the connivance of
the "chambrières" of the Lady Typhaine, his wife.
Already their scaling-ladders were against the wall,
when Juliana, Du Guesclin's sister, agitated by a
troublous dream, awoke suddenly, seized a sword,
rushed to the window, and upset three English who
were coming up the ladder, and they were killed by
the fall. The enemy retired. Next morning Du
Guesclin, on his return to Pontorson, met Felton
and his party, attacked them, and took them prisoners.
When Typhaine saw Felton, she tauntingly
exclaimed, "Comment, brave Felton, vous voilà
encore! C'est trop pour un homme de c&oelig;ur comme
<pb n="025"/><anchor id="Pg025"/>
vous d'être battu, dans une intervalle de douze heures,
une fois par la s&oelig;ur, une autre par le frère." Du
Guesclin caused the faithless "chambrières" to be
sewed up in sacks and flung into the river.</p>

<p>John IV. Duke of <corr sic="Britanny">Brittany</corr> conferred upon Du
Guesclin the government of Pontorson, of which
territory he was personally lord, by right of his
mother. It was here he often resided, and here he
celebrated being made Constable of France by King
Charles V., and fraternised with Olivier de Clisson,
agreeing to afford each other mutual help&mdash;"contre
tous ceux qui peuvent vivre et mourir." The granite
church was founded by Duke Robert, father of the
Conqueror.</p>

<p>Pontorson is the most convenient place for visiting
Mont St. Michel. Our drive thither was by the
banks of the river Couësnon, along a sandy road, bordered
on each side by hedges of tamarisks, which
leads to the "Grève," or sands, which have to be
crossed to reach the Mount, a distance of rather
more than a mile. We met numbers of bare-legged
half-clad women and children, bringing in the produce
of their fishing, shrimps and cockles tied up in
nets, and peasants with carts carrying in sea sand for
dressing the land. The appearance of Mont St.
Michel is very imposing, a cone of granite encircled
by the sea. Above rises the fortress, surmounted by
the church, a height of 400 feet from the top to the
<pb n="026"/><anchor id="Pg026"/>
water. Below, at the foot of the Mount, picturesquely
situated on an insulated rock, is the little chapel of
St. Aubert, Bishop of Avranches, the founder of St.
Michel. The Mount has been the residence of many
of our English princes. Matilda, queen of the Conqueror,
visited St. Michel.  It was here her son
Henry I., then only Count of the Cotentin, was
blockaded by his brothers William and Robert, and
obliged to surrender. Here Henry II. held his
court, and, when Henry V. overran Normandy, St.
Michel was the only fortress that held out against
him, under its gallant defender Louis d'Estouteville
of Bricquebec. Two cannons, now at the entrance
of the castle, are said to have been taken from
the English at the siege. Normandy was always the
scene of the quarrels between the English Norman
princes, of the disputes between the sons of the
Conqueror, between Stephen of Blois and Henry of
Anjou, and again of those between Henry II. and
his sons, and of Richard and his brother John, to
the latter of whom the Normans were attached.</p>

<p>Seven French kings have made pilgrimages to St.
Michel; and here Louis XI. instituted the order
of knighthood, called in honour of the archangel
St. Michael, but afterwards styled the order of the
Coquille, from the cockleshells that formed the collar
of the knights, and the golden cockle-shells that bordered
their mantles. The motto of the order was
<pb n="027"/><anchor id="Pg027"/>
the old motto of the Mount, "Immensi tremor
Oceani" (the trembling of the immeasurable ocean),
being an allusion to the popular belief that when
the English approached St. Michel, the guardian
archangel of the Mount raised a tempest to drive
the enemy's vessels upon the rocks. This belief may
be traced back to the time when the island was
occupied by the Druid priestesses, who were supposed
to have the power of raising storms and stilling
them by their magic arrows of gold.</p>

<p>We ascended by the flight of steps to the "Merveille,"
as the convent building is called, and well it
deserves its name, from its elegance, its boldness, and
its position, with a wall of above one hundred feet
high, and of immense length, rising from the rock
and supported by fifteen buttresses, and divided into
three stories. In every point of view it is one of the
most remarkable edifices of the thirteenth century.
The salle des chevaliers, where the chapters of the
knights were held, is a fine hall, with three rows
of columns, and above it are the beautiful Gothic
cloisters. The "préau" or court is surrounded by a
double row of pointed arches, interlacing each other,
and filled in with flowered spandrils and cornices,
carved with the greatest delicacy and endless variety.
The church which crowns the building is supported
by a circle of enormous columns in the crypt beneath,
called the Souterrain des Gros Piliers: it has been
<pb n="028"/><anchor id="Pg028"/>
entirely restored, and the carvings are the work of
the prisoners who were confined here. From one
of the doors we went out to the platform or terrace
called Beauregard, from the beauty of its prospect,
or sometimes Sault Gautier, from a prisoner of that
name, who three times threw himself off the platform
to commit suicide. The view from hence is most
extensive, the whole circuit of the bay extending to
the west as far as Cancale. In 1203 St. Michel
became a royal demesne, and the buildings were
entirely reconstructed by the Abbot Jourdan, assisted
by Philip Augustus; and the works were continued
by his successors to 1260.</p>

<p>Beneath and adjacent to the Mount, is the little
island of La Tombeleine or tombeau d'-Helène, so
called from a young lady of that name, who unable
to accompany her lover knight when he left for
England with the Conqueror, as soon as the vessel
which carried him away disappeared from her sight,
laid down on the shore and died. Every year, on
the anniversary of her death, the fishermen will tell
you they see a dove seated upon the Tombeleine
rock, and remain there till morning's dawn.</p>

<p>The guide pointed out to us the window of St.
Michel, from which Barbès tried to escape by means
of a cord made of his sheets cut into strips and tied
together; but the line was too short, and he fell
upon the rock and was taken up much hurt. The
<pb n="029"/><anchor id="Pg029"/>
provisions for the fortress are brought in up an
inclined plane, and raised by means of a tread-wheel,
formerly worked by the prisoners. We were conducted
to the spot where stood, with bars only three
inches apart, the iron cage in which so many celebrities
were immured. Dubourg, the Dutch journalist,
who wrote against Louis XIV., died within its
bars, devoured, it is said, by the rats. In 1777, the
Comte d'Artois (afterwards Charles X.) desired it
should be destroyed, but his wishes were disregarded.
His cousin, the Duc de Chartres (afterwards Louis
Philippe), with his brother and sister, and Madame
de Genlis, subsequently visited the Mount. All exclaimed
against the iron cage, and when they heard
that the Comte d'Artois had ordered its destruction,
they sent for hatchets, and the Duc de Chartres
gave the first blow towards its demolition; but the
fine old fortress is no longer desecrated as a prison.
The Emperor has restored it to its original position,
and it is now placed under the control of the Bishop
of Coutances, and is used as an asylum for orphans
under the care of a few Sisters.</p>

<p>Next morning we crossed the boundary between
Normandy and Brittany, the river Couësnon, which
has often changed its course, once, it is said, running
beyond St. Michel&mdash;hence the popular saying&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Le Couësnon par sa folie</q></l>
<l><q rend="post">A mis le Mont en Normandie.</q></l></lg>

<pb n="030"/><anchor id="Pg030"/>
<p>We had a beautiful drive to Dol or Dol-de-Bretagne,
as it is styled, to distinguish it from the fortress of the
same name in the Jura, upon the taking of which
Madame de Sevigné writes in her letters with so much
enthusiasm. We were now fairly in Brittany, which
though geographically part of France still remains
very distinct, owing to the Celtic origin of its inhabitants.
Brittany consists of five departments;
but it is in Lower Brittany alone, comprised in the
departments of Finistère, Morbihan, and the Côtes-du-Nord,
that the true Celtic race, its language,
names, features, costumes, and superstitions are to
be found.</p>

<p>This is the true Brittany, the Bretagne Bretonnante
of Froissart, who calls the eastern part of the
province, La Bretagne Douce, because the French
language is spoken there. Dol was the great
bulwark of Brittany against Normandy; the wall
and moat surrounding the town, with some of the
towers, still remain. Many of the houses are built,
as the French term it, "en colombage" that is,
with the upper story projecting some fifteen feet
over the ground-floor, forming a gallery or porch
supported by oak posts or columns with sculptured
capitals of the thirteenth century. The inn we occupied
had one of these porches: Madame Barbot,
our landlady, and her maid, were both dressed in
Breton costume, with lace-trimmed embroidered
<pb n="031"/><anchor id="Pg031"/>
caps and aprons of fine muslin, clear-starched and
ironed with a perfection which the most accomplished
"blanchisseuse du fin" of Paris would find
it difficult to surpass. The people here have the
Breton physiognomy, sharp black eyes, short roundi
faces and brown freckled complexions, a contrast to
the blue eyes, long oval faces,
and bright tints of their Norman
neighbours.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 7. Pilaster and Cornice from the Tomb of Bishop James, Cathedral, Dol.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w25" url="images/image07.jpg">
    <head>7. Pilaster and Cornice from the <lb />Tomb of Bishop James, Cathedral, <lb />Dol.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>The principal building at
Dol is the Cathedral, built
of grey granite, in the style
of many of our English
churches. On the south is
the "porte episcopale," a
large projecting porch with
mullioned sides, and, near it,
a smaller porch with a central
column semée of hearts, the
"armes parlantes" of Bishop
C&oelig;uret who built it. The
clustered columns of the nave,
consist of a central pillar surrounded
by four others running
up to the roof, so slender and delicate that
they are united to the centre by small bars of iron.
Over the high altar is an enormous wooden crozier,
carved and gilt, from which the Host is suspended.
<pb n="032"/><anchor id="Pg032"/>
A beautiful Renaissance tomb on the north side of
the cathedral was raised in 1507 to the memory of
Bishop James,
who died three
years before.
The sculpture is
much mutilated,
but the arabesques
are
most delicately
and elegantly
chiselled. It is
supposed to be
the work of Jean
Just of Tours, sculptor of the magnificent tomb of
Louis XII. and Anne of Brittany, erected at St.
Denis by order of Francis I.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 8. Front of the Tomb of Bishop James, Cathedral, Dol.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w50" url="images/image08.jpg">
    <head>8. Front of the Tomb of Bishop James, <lb />Cathedral, Dol.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>The chapel of St. Samson, patron saint of the
cathedral, has been restored. Mad people were
brought here for cure, and placed in a recess which
still remains; the opening was covered over by an
iron grating. Dol was formerly the ecclesiastical
metropolis of Brittany; the see was founded by
Samson, one of those British monks, who, with a
whole population of men and women, emigrated
from England to escape the Saxon slavery. They
crossed the Channel in barks made of skins sewn
together, singing, as they went, the Lamentations of
<pb n="033"/><anchor id="Pg033"/>
the Psalmist. This emigration lasted more than a
century (from 450 to 550), and poured a Christian
population into a Celtic country where paganism
was longest preserved. St. Samson and his six
suffragans&mdash;all monks, missionaries, and bishops, like
himself&mdash;were called the "Seven Saints of Brittany;"
St. Samson was what was termed an "evêque portatif,"
meaning a bishop without a diocese, until he
founded that of Dol. Telio, also a British monk,
with the assistance of St. Samson, planted near Dol
an orchard three miles in length, and to him is
attributed the first introduction of the apple-tree
into Brittany. Wherever the monks went, they cultivated
the soil; all had in their mouths the words of
the Apostle, "If any would not work, neither should
he eat." The people admired the industry of the
new comers, and, from admiration they passed to
imitation; the peasants joined the monks in tilling
the ground, and even the brigands became agriculturists.
"The Cross and the plough, labour and
prayer," was the motto of these early missionaries.</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Sûr que le Ciel maudit l'arbre stérile,</q></l>
<l>Le sage passe en opérant le bien:</l>
<l>Vivre et mourir à l'univers utile,</l>
<l><q rend="post">C'est la devise et l'esprit du chrétien.</q></l>
<l rend="right"><bibl>
  <title rend="italic">Chants de Piété</title>, 
  <author rend="smallcaps">Malo de Garaby</author></bibl>.</l>
</lg>

<p>The monks of Dol were great bee-farmers, as we
learn from an anecdote told by Count Montalembert
<pb n="034"/><anchor id="Pg034"/>
in his 'Moines de l'Occident.' One day when St. Samson
of Dol and St. Germain, Bishop of Paris,
were conversing on the respective merits of their
monasteries, St. Samson said that his monks were
such good and careful preservers of their bees that,
besides the honey which they yielded in abundance,
they furnished more wax than was used in the
churches during the year, but that, their climate
not being fit for the growth of vines, they had great
scarcity of wine. Upon hearing this, St. Germain
replied, "We, on the contrary, produce more wine
than we can consume, but we have to buy wax; so,
if you will furnish us with wax, we will give you a
tenth of our wine." Samson accepted the offer, and
the mutual arrangement was continued during the
lives of the two saints.</p>

<p>The marshy country round Dol has been formerly
inundated by the sea; it is now reclaimed and protected
by a dyke twenty-two miles long, extending
from Pontorson to Chateauneuf. The whole tract
is full of buried wood, a submerged forest, which
the people dig up, and use for furniture. It is black,
like the Irish bog-oak. They call it "couëron."
In the midst of this plain rises a mamelon or insulated
granite rock, resembling in form Mont St.
Michel, called the Mont Dol. On the top is the
little chapel of Notre Dame de l'Espérance, upon
which was formerly a telegraph, and near it is a
<pb n="035"/><anchor id="Pg035"/>
column surmounted by a colossal statue of Our
Lady. Mont Dol was a consecrated place of the
Druids. The guides showed us a spring which
never dries, and also a rock upon which they point
out the print of the foot of the demon, left by him
when wrestling with St. Michael. We met the curé,
who gave us a medal of the church, and told us the
principal points in the view before us, extending
over the whole Bay of Cancale.</p>
<pb n="036"/><anchor id="Pg036"/>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 9. Menhir, near Dol.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image09.jpg">
    <head>9. Menhir, near Dol.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>On our way back to Dol, we walked to a cornfield,
in the midst of it stands a menhir<note place="foot">
The largest menhir in Finistère is on a lande near the
farm of Kergloas, or "the plain of mourning;" this, with the
menhir of Dol, have probably been erected as funeral monuments,
or point out the scene of some battle slaughter.</note> (they are so
termed from the Breton <hi rend="italic">m&oelig;n</hi>, stone, and <hi rend="italic">hir</hi>, long),
called the "Pierre du champ dolant," a shaft of gray
granite, about thirty feet high, and said to measure
fifteen more underground. On the top is a cross.
The first preachers of Christianity, unable to uproot
the veneration for the menhirs, surmounted them
with the cross, preserving the worship but changing
the symbol. In the same manner, they did not
attempt to destroy the veneration for sacred groves
and fountains, but transferred to new saints the
miracles of times past.</p>

<p>We drove through a pretty country to see the
Château of Combourg, where Chateaubriand passed
his early days. It is a fine square castle of the
fifteenth century, with massive towers at each corner,
surrounded by trees, and standing proudly over the
village below. The drawbridge has been replaced by
a modern "perron" or flight of stone steps, which
leads to the entrance hall. The salle d'honneur
looks over a lake. We were taken into his little
melancholy room which Chateaubriand so well
describes.</p>
<pb n="037"/><anchor id="Pg037"/>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 10. Château of Combourg.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image10.jpg">
    <head>10. Château of Combourg.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p rend="small">"La fenêtre de mon donjon s'ouvrait sur le cour intérieure;
le jour, j'avais en perspective les créneaux de la courtine opposeé,
où végétaient des scolopendres et croissait un prunier sauvage.
Quelques martinets, qui, durant l'été, s'enfonçaient en criant
dans les trous des murs, étaient mes seuls compagnons. La
nuit je n'apercevais qu'un petit morceau du ciel et quelques
étoiles. Lorsque la lune brillait et qu'elle s'abaissait à l'occident,
j'en étais averti par ses rayons, qui venaient à mon lit au
travers des carreaux losangés de la fenêtre. Des chouettes
voletant d'un tour à l'autre, passant et repassant entre la
lune et moi, dessinaient sur mes rideaux l'ombre mobile de
leurs ailes."</p>

<p>The bed on which Chateaubriand died has been
brought from Paris and placed in the room.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 11. Peasant Girl of Cancale.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image11.jpg">
    <head>11. Peasant Girl of Cancale.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>The next morning we left Dol for Cancale, of
such world-wide celebrity for its oysters. We left
the railway at La Gouesnière, five miles and a half
from Cancale, to which we proceeded by the mail
<pb n="038"/><anchor id="Pg038"/>
cart. It requires to travel in Brittany to form any
notion of the detestable vehicles, whether public or
"voitures à volonté," in which travellers in this country
are condemned to ride. Uncleaned, unpainted,
creaking, jolting machines&mdash;as fully tenanted with
every kind of insect annoyance, as if one were travelling
in a hen-house. The horses are good, hardy,
enduring little animals, which go their thirty to
<pb n="039"/><anchor id="Pg039"/>
fifty miles a day without any distress either to
themselves or the traveller. The Breton drivers are
gentle and kind, making more use of their voices
than of their whips in urging on their horses. The
town of Cancale is situated on the heights, a precipitous
descent leading to the village below, called
La Houle, which lines the edge of the shore, and
is occupied mostly by fishermen. This is the port,
and here are the pier and the lighthouse, and also
a comfortable inn to which the people of St. Malo
resort in large parties, an omnibus running thence
daily. The panoramic view of the bay of Cancale is
beautiful and most extensive, one vast crescent of
sand some ten square leagues in extent, stretching
from the picturesque rocks of Cancale to Granville,
its most northern point, and including Mont Dol,
Mont St. Michel, and Avranches.  The western
side is lined with huts and windmills, but the water
is so shallow that no boat can land. Having walked
round the little hurdled-in oyster parks, numbering,
we were told, about 600, and made ourselves very
wet and dirty, though we borrowed sabots to enable
us to wade through the mud, we returned to the
inn, and next day reached St. Malo.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 12. Tomb of Chateaubriand, and View of St. Malo.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image12.jpg">
    <head>12. Tomb of Chateaubriand, and View of St. Malo.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>


<p>St. Malo stands on a small granite island at the
mouth of the Rance, connected, by a causeway
called "Le Sillon," with the mainland. The space
it occupies is so small, that castle, churches, streets,
<pb n="040"/><anchor id="Pg040"/>
and towers are all crowded together, and the whole
is nearly surrounded by a sea wall, which makes the
town appear as if rising straight out of the ocean.
Towards the sea, the bay is encircled with groups of
craggy islets, many surmounted by forts, bristling
up as the tide recedes, in every direction. Conspicuous
among these island rocks is that called the
<pb n="041"/><anchor id="Pg041"/>
Grand Bé, chosen by Chateaubriand for his last
resting-place, as he wished to be buried near the
place of his birth. Singularly enough the name of
the island "Bé" signifies a tomb. On his request
being granted, Chateaubriand wrote to the Mayor
of St. Malo.</p>

<p rend="small">
"Enfin, Monsieur, j'aurai un tombeau, et je vous le devrai,
ainsi qu'à mes bienveillants compatriotes. Vous savez, Monsieur,
que je ne veux que quelques pieds de sable, une pierre
de rivage sans ornement et sans inscription, une simple croix
de fer, et une petite grille pour empêcher les animaux de me
deterrer. La croix dira que l'homme réposant à ses pieds était
un Chrétien; cela suffit à ma mémoire."
</p>

<p>At low water, the island is accessible on foot.
The tomb consists of a plain stone without inscription,
surmounted by a granite cross, and is surrounded
by an iron railing. It is placed on the
edge of a rock, and is the resort of crowds of
pilgrims.</p>

<p rend="display; small">
"La vaste mer murmure autour de son cercueil."
</p>

<p>The Hôtel de France is the house where Chateaubriand's
family lived, and the room he occupied is
filled with various memorials of him. The Chateaubriand
arms hang upon the wall. They were given
by St. Louis to an ancestor who was wounded and
taken prisoner at the battle of Massoura. The King
changed the peacock's plumes, previously borne by
the family, to fleurs de lys on a field gules, with the
<pb n="042"/><anchor id="Pg042"/>
proud motto "Mon sang teint les bannières de
France." The tides here rise to between forty and
fifty feet above low-water mark, so that the harbour
is dry at low water, and is crossed on foot to go to
St. Servan, the suburb on the opposite side.</p>

<p>We walked round the ramparts and were shown
the little gate down which were sent every night the
watch dogs of St. Malo, "chiens Anglais qui
s'appelent dogues." Shut up during the day, they
were let out at ten at night, and recalled in the
morning to the sound of a copper trumpet, by their
keeper, styled the "chiennetier." Enactments were
made for their maintenance, called the "droit de
chiennage." When let loose at night, a warning
bell was rung to apprise the inhabitants, as they
tore the legs of every one they met. Hence it used
to be said "Il a été à St. Malo, les chiens lui ont
rongé les mollets." In 1770, a naval officer trying to
force a passage was attacked by a troop of these
dogs prowling between St. Malo and St. Servan;
his sword was useless as defence, and, exhausted, in
despair he threw himself into the sea, but here he
was followed by the dogs and torn to pieces. A few
days after they were all destroyed by the municipality,
and the custom of keeping them has been
since discontinued. In an old map of St. Malo, or
"Saint Malo de l'isle," as it was then styled, preserved
in the Imperial Library at Paris, is laid down,
<pb n="043"/><anchor id="Pg043"/>
near the "Sillon" a little sentry-box marked, "Corps-de-garde
de nuit pour les chiens," and again, near
the "Tour de la grande Porte," is the "Pont aux
chiens." The date of the map is 1662. The arms
of St. Malo till the seventeenth century were, on a
field argent, a mastiff gules.</p>

<p>The castle dates principally from the Queen-Duchess
Anne, and one of its massive towers, the
"Qui qu'en grogne" is a memorial of her dauntless
spirit. Twice crowned Queen of France, she was
the only one of her line worthy of the ducal crown.
The Bishop of St. Malo was temporal lord of the
town, and maintained he held it direct from the
Pope, as a fief of the Church, because it was built
upon land where a convent formerly stood; and
consequently the Duke of Brittany had no authority
over it, either spiritual or temporal. Duke John V.
began to build a castle, but the Bishop opposed himself
to its construction, and the contest lasted on
until the time of the Queen-Duchess Anne, who, in
defiance of the Bishop, and to shew that she was and
always would be sovereign of St. Malo, finished the
fortress and caused the lofty inscription to be placed
in raised letters upon the great tower: "Qui qu'en
grogne, ainsi sera, c'est mon plaisir;"&mdash;so runs the
legend, but unfortunately a similar story is told of
Louis II., Duke of Bourbon.</p>

<p>On the opposite side of the mouth of the Rance
<pb n="044"/><anchor id="Pg044"/>
is Dinard, lately become a favourite watering-place;
it has good sands, and houses and villas are rapidly
rising up in every direction, and covering its granite
hills.</p>

<p>The prettiest route to Dinan is by the little
steamer which ascends the Rance, a lovely voyage,
occupying about two hours. The banks one mixture
of rocks, valleys, and verdure; the river now
expanding into the width of a lake, now narrowing
between its forest-clothed sides. After passing
through a lock, and, winding our way through a
narrow pass of rocky crags, we reached the bridge
of Dinan; above us, the gigantic granite viaduct
stretched across the valley, the town, with its feudal
walls and castle, perched on its rocky heights over
the river.</p>

<p>In the Grande Place is a miserable statue of Du
Guesclin, who looks more like a wandering minstrel
than the hero of Brittany and Constable of
France. His life forms quite an historic romance.
His future greatness was foretold by a prophetess;
his wife, the Lady Tiphaine, was herself a fairy; his
battles resemble those of the giants of old. Du
Guesclin was born at Broons, and was the eldest of
ten children and of great trouble to his parents.
One day his mother dreamt she was in possession of
a casket, containing portraits of herself and her lord,
and on one side were set nine precious stones of
<pb n="045"/><anchor id="Pg045"/>
lustrous beauty encircling one rough unpolished
pebble. In her dream she carried the casket to a
lapidary, and asked him to take out the rough stone
as unworthy of such goodly company; but he advised
her to allow it to remain, and subsequently it
shone forth more brilliantly than the precious gems
with which it was surrounded. The after superiority
of Bertrand over the other nine children
explained the dream.</p>

<p>It was in this "Place," where his statue now
stands, the celebrated duel took place between Du
Guesclin and an English knight, called by the
Breton chroniclers Thomas of Cantorbéry. Dinan
was at that time closely besieged by the Duke of
Lancaster (1359), with the young Count de Montfort,
and defended by Du Guesclin. A truce of
forty days had been agreed upon, before the expiration
of which Oliver, brother of Du Guesclin,
rode out unarmed beyond the city walls, and was
made prisoner by Thomas of Cantorbéry, who demanded
a ransom of 1000 florins. On this news
reaching Du Guesclin, he immediately repaired to
the English camp, where he found the Duke of
Lancaster playing chess with Sir John Chandos.
They received him most cordially, and agreed that
the dispute should be settled by a combat within
the walls, the Duke of Lancaster consenting to preside.
Victory declared in favour of Du Guesclin,
<pb n="046"/><anchor id="Pg046"/>
who would have cut off the head of his adversary,
had not the Duke of Lancaster interceded for his
life. Cantorbéry was dragged upon a hurdle out
of the lists, and condemned to pay 1000 florins to
Oliver; his horse and armour were given to Bertrand,
and the felon knight expelled the English
army.</p>

<p>We drove to see the Castle of Montafilant, one
of the apanages of the Rohan family, which passed
with many others to the unfortunate Gilles de
Bretagne, by his marriage with the heiress Françoise
de Dinan. The castle is approached by a steep
winding path, leading to the plateau upon which it
stands. Before the use of firearms, its position rendered
it impregnable. Of its seven towers, two only
remain.</p>

<p>The story of Gilles de Bretagne forms the subject
of a romance by the Vicomte Walsh. Though his
conduct was not free from blame, his long captivity
and tragic end have rendered this unfortunate prince
an object of pity to posterity. Third son of Duke
John V., he was reared with Henry VI. of England,
and personally attached to the English; but he
never was in league with England against his own
country, and his uncle the Constable Richemont
regarded him as the honour and hope of his house.
His wife Françoise was the most beautiful and accomplished
woman of her time, the "perle de noblesse,
<pb n="047"/><anchor id="Pg047"/>
de gentilesse, et de savoir;" and moreover possessed of
the rich inheritance of her uncle Bertrand de Dinan,
of the Montafilant branch. She had been betrothed
from her infancy to the Sire de Gavre, son of Guy,
Comte de Laval; but her father died when she was
only eight years old, and Gilles de Bretagne carried
her off by force. Dissatisfied with his paternal inheritance,
the lordship of Champtocé, he retired to
Guildo, one of the châteaux of Françoise's dower,
where he passed his time in company with his
English archers. His withdrawal from court was
represented to Duke Francis as the beginning of
a revolt, by Arthur de Montauban, his bitterest
enemy and a great favourite of the Duke. Gilles
neglected his young wife, and she is reported, in an
unguarded moment, to have said to Montauban,
she would marry him "if her husband were to die."
Duke Francis was determined to get rid of his
brother, and Charles VII. was persuaded to assist
him in his vile design. The King arrested Gilles
on the charge of high treason, as being in correspondence
with the English; and, in proof of the
charge, his enemies produced forged letters from
the King of England compromising the loyalty of
Gilles. Charles gave him over to his brother for
punishment. In vain were Gilles's supplications to
the Duke, or the entreaties of the Constable, who
went to Dinan and knelt to Francis to beg for the
<pb n="048"/><anchor id="Pg048"/>
pardon of his brother. Equally fruitless his being
acquitted at Rédon, from there being no proof of
his guilt. The unfortunate Gilles was dragged from
prison to prison, and consigned to keepers destitute
of every feeling of humanity.  Montauban, an
Italian by descent (his mother was a Visconti), sent
for poison from Lombardy, and administered in his
soup a strong dose, which the good constitution of
Gilles enabled him to resist. Starvation was then
tried, and the wretched Gilles would stand at his
prison window, calling on the passers by to give
him bread: "Du pain, du pain pour l'amour de
Dieu," but no one ventured to relieve him. At
last, a poor woman dared to give him food, and
placed a loaf on the edge of his grated window,
continuing for six months to share with him in
secret her scanty meal of black bread. Seeing that
he could hold out no longer and that his death was
determined upon, Gilles begged the woman would
fetch him a minister of religion, that he might confess
before he died. By stealth she brought him a
Cordelier monk, who confessed him across the bars
of his prison, and Gilles adjured him to seek his
brother and acquaint him with his pitiable condition.
The monk started on his errand, but in the
mean time the gaolers of Gilles determined on
putting an end to his life. They twisted a cloth
round his neck, and smothered him between two
<pb n="049"/><anchor id="Pg049"/>
mattresses while he slept. The monks of Bosquen
carried his body to their abbey for interment, and
the wooden effigy that was placed over his grave is
still preserved in the Museum at St. Brieuc. The
monk who had received Gilles's confession went in
quest of Duke Francis, who, on hearing of his
brother's death when at Avranches, had left for
Saint Michel. The monk met him on the Grève,
and cited him in the name of his brother "de la
part du Messire Gilles" to appear within fifty days
at the tribunal of Heaven to answer for his murder.
The menace was realised. Duke Francis died within
the appointed time, struck with remorse, and terrified
at the summons of the Cordelier. The monk was
never seen again. On the death of Gilles, the Duke
of Brittany himself wished to marry Françoise, but
she would not listen to his proposals; and at last
was obliged, in order to recover her liberty, to marry
the aged Comte de Laval, father of her betrothed,
with whom she lived peacefully thirty years, and had
three sons. Duke Francis II. appointed her to the
charge of rearing his daughter Anne.</p>

<p>Arthur Montauban turned monk to avoid the
vengeance of Duke Peter, brother of Gilles, and
eventually became Archbishop of Bordeaux. The
Pope gave him the Abbey of Rédon, but popular
indignation prevented him from accepting the appointment.</p>
<pb n="050"/><anchor id="Pg050"/>

<p>On our return from Montafilant we stopped to
visit the Lunatic Asylum (Asile des aliénés), called
Les Bas Foins, kept by the brothers of Saint-Jean-de-Dieu.
There are six hundred inmates under the
charge of about sixty brethren. The buildings,
with the chapel, are very handsome and most complete
in all the arrangements. Within the enclosure
is a large piece of land. The lunatics are
employed in agricultural, garden, and house occupations;
they look very contented and happy.
Visitors are not allowed to speak to them. We
omitted seeing the Croix du Saint Esprit, a curiously
sculptured Gothic granite cross of the fourteenth
century, not far from the asylum.</p>

<p>The castle of Dinan is now a prison. It was
occupied by the Queen-Duchess Anne, when on
her way to a pilgrimage to Notre Dame-du-Folgoët,
in fulfilment of a vow made during the illness of
Louis XII. In the chapel is shewn a sculptured
seat, still called the arm-chair of the Duchess Anne.
Within these walls were crammed, in the last century,
about 2000 English prisoners of war, many of
whom fell victims to a contagious fever. From the
platform of the keep we had a magnificent view of
the surrounding country, extending to Mont Dol
and the sea.</p>

<p>The church of St. Sauveur has a richly sculptured
Romanesque portal. It contains the heart of
<pb n="051"/><anchor id="Pg051"/>
Du Guesclin, transferred from the church of the
Dominicans, where he desired it to be interred
by the side of his wife Tiphaine. His body was
buried at St. Denis, in a tomb King Charles V.
caused to be made in his lifetime, and he left
orders that on his death his Constable should
repose at his feet. On the dark-coloured monumental
stone now incrusted on the wall, are roughly
sculptured his arms (an eagle displayed charged
with a cotice<note place="foot">In heraldic language,
"argent, à l'aigle de sable éployée à
deux têtes, becquée et membrée de gueules, à la cotice de
gueules mise en bande, brochant sur le tout, ce qui semble
être une brisure de cadet."</note>), with a commemorative inscription
in gold letters:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display; text-align: center">
<l><q rend="pre">Cy: gist: le cueur: de</q></l>
<l>Missire: bertram: du gueaqu&#0299;</l>
<l>en: son viv&#0257;t: con&#0275;tiable de</l>
<l>france: qui: trepassa: le: xiii^e</l>
<!--FIXME: atm, there is no way to get superscripts except with Unicode U0300-->
<l>jour: de: jullet: l'an: mil iii^e</l>
<l>IIII^xx dont: son: corps: repos</l>
<l>avecques: ceulx: des: Roys</l>
<l><q rend="post">a sainct: denis en France.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>Above hangs a painting representing the Governor
of Châteauneuf Randon, laying the keys of the
town upon the dead body of the Constable.<note place="foot">
The Governor of Châteauneuf Randon (Dép. Lozère)
had promised Du Guesclin he would surrender the place if
relief did not arrive in fourteen days. The morning dawned,
and no help had come. Du Guesclin lay dead, and the governor
refused to give up the keys to any but to him. At noontide,
the gates of the city were thrown open, and the governor
issued forth at the head of the garrison, traversed the army at
the sound of trumpets, and entered the tent where the body
of the dead hero lay, on a table covered with flowers, and surrounded
by the chiefs of the army. The governor knelt beside
the corpse, and reverently placed the keys on the coffin.
"Thus," he said, "I fulfil my promise, and keep faith to thee,
oh noble Du Guesclin, even in death."</note></p>
<pb n="052"/><anchor id="Pg052"/>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 13. Effigy of Jean de Beaumanoir.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image13.jpg">
    <head>13. Effigy of Jean de Beaumanoir.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>Many of the streets of Dinan preserve the character
of the Middle Ages, the houses upon columns
forming a kind of porch or covered way; and most
curious of all is the dirty, steep, narrow, winding
street, called the Rue de Jerzual, a ravine extending
from the top of the town, in one pitch, to the river's
edge. The Museum at the Mairie has an interesting
collection of tumulary slabs&mdash;recumbent figures
<pb n="053"/><anchor id="Pg053"/>
taken from different churches and abbeys, mostly
from the Beaumanoir chapel of the Abbey of
Lehon. There is one of Jean de Beaumanoir, son
of the hero of the "Combat des Trente," treacherously
slain by his steward. He is represented in
full armour, but with his head bare, to indicate the
manner of his death. The effigy of his wife is also
in complete armour, but on the belt that encircles her
waist, like those worn by the knights, is sculptured
a wreath of roses. She was a Du Guesclin by birth,
and her feet repose upon an eagle, the bearing of
her house. The statue of Roland, Vicomte de
Dinan, one of the nine great Barons of Brittany
in the twelfth century, is of gigantic proportions;
the warrior is clad from head to foot in chain mail,
but he holds one of his gauntlets in his hand. In
the Museum is also a clock given to the city of
Dinan by the Duchess Anne, inscribed with the
name of its maker and the date of its construction:
"1498, à Nantes par M. Hainzer de cette ville."
The ancient bronze standard measures (étalons) of
Dinan are decorated with the arms of the City, and
Gothic inscriptions in relief, "Cart (quart) à gros
blé pour Dinan"&mdash;"Cart à fourmant (froment) pour
Dinan"&mdash;and "Bouesceau à scel (boisseau à sel)
pour Dinan." Portraits of Du Guesclin and other
Breton worthies are in one of the rooms (Salle de
l'Odéon). That of the Constable answers to the
<pb n="054"/><anchor id="Pg054"/>
description given of his appearance. He was low
in stature, with large Breton head, broad shoulders,
long arms, and large hands. His eyes were green,
and his complexion swarthy: "la peau noire comme
un sanglier."</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 14. Château of La Bellière.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image14.jpg">
    <head>14. Château of La Bellière.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>The drives round Dinan are endless in variety,<note place="foot">
<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Tel est Dinan, la ville aux sites poétiques,</q></l>
<l>Aux coteaux escarpés, aux vallons romantiques;</l>
<l>Qui, gracieuse, élève, au milieu des vergers,</l>
<l>Ses remparts tout couverts de jardins et d'ombrage,</l>
<l>Son château crénelé, monument d'un autre age,</l>
<l rend="right"><q rend="post">Et les dômes de ses clochers.</q>&mdash;<bibl><author rend="smallcaps">Aubry</author></bibl>.</l>
</lg></note>
and all beautiful. We took a carriage to see the
Château of la Bellière, about five miles and a half
from Dinan, formerly the residence of Du Guesclin's
<pb n="055"/><anchor id="Pg055"/>
wife, the celebrated Lady Tiphaine; her name
answers probably to our English Tiffany:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">William de Coningsby&mdash;</q></l>
<l>Came out of Brittany</l>
<l>With his wife Tiffany</l>
<l>And her maid Manifas</l>
<l><q rend="post">And his doggs Hardigras.</q></l>
</lg>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 15. Chimney. Château of La Bellière.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w25" url="images/image15.jpg">
    <head>15. Chimney. Château <lb />of La Bellière.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>The Lady Tiphaine was heiress and daughter of the
Vicomte de Bellière; so deeply versed was she in
astrology, she was called Tiphaine la Fée. During
her husband's absence in Spain, she resided at Mont
Saint Michel, having chosen this insulated spot for
the facilities it afforded her of studying the stars.
She gave Du Guesclin a calendar on vellum, containing
verses at the beginning of each month,
pointing out the lucky and unlucky days; how
many she marked down as such, we know not.
Tycho Brahe had thirty-two fatal days in his calendar.
Had Du Guesclin consulted this precious volume,
which is now preserved in the Library at Avranches,
he would never have risked his fortune by fighting
the battle of Auray on the Feast of St. Michel, one
of the fatal days against which she specially warns
him in her book. We wished to have seen the
room where she died, and where many memorials
of her are preserved; but the proprietor was at his
déjeuner, and would not grant us admittance, so
we were forced to be content with seeing the exterior
<pb n="056"/><anchor id="Pg056"/>
of the house, a château of the end of the fourteenth
century. It stands on the edge of a large sheet of
water, in the midst of trees on the roadside
between Dinan and St. Malo. Its
principal characteristics are its tall octagonal
chimney-shafts, composed of
granite, brick, and slate.  They are
surmounted by pieces of slate placed
edgeways and forming a kind of capital
or coronet to the granite shaft. Some
of the chimneys have two circles of
these coronets, and others are enriched
with little rows of arches, of which the
sombre slate background throws out
the delicate ornamentation. Recrossing
the magnificent viaduct, we proceeded
to visit the Benedictine Priory of Lehon,
called in the country "Chapelle des Beaumanoirs"
from the mortuary chapel of that family attached
to the abbey:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Beaumanoir! à ce nom de glorieux prodiges</q></l>
<l>Des siècles écoulés réveillent les prestiges:</l>
<l>La pierre des tombeaux a paru se mouvoir</l>
<l>Et des trente Bretons les clameurs belliqueuses</l>
<l>Semblent répondre, sous ces voûtes fameuses,</l>
<l><q rend="post">A ce grand nom de Beaumanoir.</q>
&mdash;<bibl><author rend="smallcaps">Aubry</author></bibl>.</l>
</lg>

<p>The west front, with its round-arched portal surmounted
by a large Gothic window, is very pretty.
The chapel of the Beaumanoirs was ravaged at
<pb n="057"/><anchor id="Pg057"/>
the Revolution, the lead of the coffins sold, and
the bones scattered. The statues have since been
removed to the Museum at Dinan, and the crypt
beneath, where they were buried, is inaccessible.
At the Revolution, when the monks were expelled,
the priory was sold and used for a spinning factory;
and the weight of the machines crushed the floors,
so as to shut up the entrance to the vaults. In the
parish church adjacent, is to be noticed an ancient
baptismal font, of cylindrical form, sculptured
within and without. We returned home by the
Château du Chêne-Ferron, approached by an avenue
of firs, and had a lovely drive along the banks of
the Rance.</p>

<p>Our last excursion in Dinan was to the Château
of La Garaye, rendered famous by the virtues and
boundless charity of its last proprietors, Count
Claude Toussaint Marot de la Garaye and his wife,
whose interesting story is told in the charming poem
of Mrs. Norton:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Listen to the tale I tell,</q></l>
<l>Grave the story is&mdash;not sad,</l>
<l>And the peasant plodding by</l>
<l>Greets the place with kindly eye,</l>
<l><q rend="post">For the inmates that it had.</q></l>

<l rend="right"><bibl>
 <author rend="smallcaps">The Lady of La Garaye.</author>
</bibl></l></lg>

<p>Count Claude de la Garaye and his wife were young,
beautiful, and endowed with friends, riches, and all
<pb n="058"/><anchor id="Pg058"/>
that could make life bright and happy. They entertained
with hospitality, and enjoyed the pleasures
and amusements of the world; when one day the
Countess was thrown from her horse, the expectations
of an heir vanished, and she was left a cripple
for life. Both were inconsolable for their
disappointment. One day a monk came to visit them,
and tried to comfort them, seeking by his converse
to turn their thoughts from earthly affections to
heavenly consolation&mdash;</p>

<p>"Ah! my father," said the lady, "how happy are
you, to love nothing on earth!"</p>

<p>"You are mistaken," answered the monk; "I love
all those who are in sorrow or suffering, and I submit
myself to the will of the Almighty, and bend myself
with resignation to every blow He strikes."</p>

<p>He proceeded to show them there was still great
happiness in store for them, in ministering to the
comforts of others. Following his counsel, they
went to Paris; for three years the Count studied
medicine and surgery, and his wife became a
skilful oculist. On their return to La Garaye, they
gave up all the amusements of society, and devoted
themselves to relieving the sufferings of their
fellow creatures. Their house was converted into
an hospital for the sick and the wounded, under
the ministering care of the Count and his benevolent
wife:&mdash;</p>
<pb n="059"/><anchor id="Pg059"/>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Her home is made their home; her wealth their dole;</q></l>
<l>Her busy courtyard hears no more the roll</l>
<l>Of gilded vehicles, or pawing steeds,</l>
<l>But feeble steps of those whose bitter needs</l>
<l>Are their sole passport. Through that gateway pass</l>
<l>All varying forms of sickness and distress,</l>
<l>And many a poor worn face that hath not smiled</l>
<l>For years,&mdash;and many a feeble crippled child,&mdash;</l>
<l>Blesses the tall, white portal where they stand,</l>
<l><q rend="post">And the dear Lady of the liberal hand.</q></l>

<l rend="right"><bibl>
 <author rend="smallcaps">The Lady of La Garaye.</author>
</bibl></l></lg>

<p>Nor was their philanthropy confined to their own
province. In 1720, they offered themselves to M.
de Belzunce&mdash;"Marseilles' good bishop"&mdash;to assist
him during the visitation of the Plague. The fame
of their virtues reached even the French Court, and
Louis XV. sent Count de la Garaye the order of St.
Lazarus with a donation of 50,000 livres and a contract
on the post of 25,000 more.</p>

<p>They both died at an advanced age, within two
years of each other, and were buried among their
poor at Taden, but their marble mausoleum in the
church was destroyed in the French Revolution.
Count de la Garaye<note place="foot">Count Claude died
in 1755, at the age of eighty-one. The
countess in 1757, at seventy-six.</note> left a large sum to be distributed
among the prisoners, principally English, at Rennes
and Dinan, who were suffering pent up in these
crowded gaols. The Comte had attended the
English prisoners at Dinan during a contagious
<pb n="060"/><anchor id="Pg060"/>
fever, called the "peste blanche," and, in acknowledgment
of his humanity, Queen Caroline sent him
two dogs with silver collars round their necks, and an
English nobleman made him a present of six more.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 16. Château of La Garaye.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image16.jpg">
    <head>16. Château of La Garaye.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>The ruined château is approached by an ivy-covered
gateway, through an avenue of beeches:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Le lierre flottant comme un manteau de deuil,</q></l>
<l><q rend="post">Couvre à demi la porte et rampe sur le seuil.</q></l>
<l rend="right"><bibl>
 <author rend="smallcaps">Lamartine</author>,
 <title rend="italic">Harmonies Poëtiques</title>.
</bibl></l></lg>

<p>or, as Mrs. Norton renders it:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">And like a mourner's mantle, with sad grace,</q></l>
<l>Waves the dark ivy&mdash;hiding half the door</l>
<l>And threshold, where the weary traveller's foot</l>
<l><q rend="post">Shall never find a courteous welcome more.</q></l>
</lg>
<pb n="061"/><anchor id="Pg061"/>
<p>It is fast falling to pieces. The principal part
remaining is an octagonal turret of three stories,
with elegant Renaissance decoration round the windows.
One more quotation from Mrs. Norton, and
we quit these hallowed ruins:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">We know the healthy stir of human life</q></l>
<l>Must be for ever gone!</l>
<l>The walls where hung the warrior's shining casque</l>
<l>Are green with moss and mould;</l>
<l>The blindworm coils where Queens have slept, nor asks</l>
<l>For shelter from the cold.</l>
<l>The swallow,&mdash;he is master all the day,</l>
<l>And the great owl is ruler through the night;</l>
<l>The little bat wheels on his circling way,</l>
<l>With restless flittering flight;</l>
<l>And that small bat, and the creeping things,</l>
<l>At will they come and go,</l>
<l>And the soft white owl with velvet wings,</l>
<l>And a shout of human woe!</l>
<l>The brambles let no footsteps pass</l>
<l>By that rent in the broken stair,</l>
<l>When the pale tufts of the windle-strae grass</l>
<l>Hang like locks of dry dead hair;</l>
<l>But there the keen sound ever sweeps and moans,</l>
<l><q rend="">Working a passage through the mouldering stones.</q></l>

<l rend="right"><bibl>
 <author rend="smallcaps">The Lady of La Garaye.</author>
</bibl></l></lg>

<p>From Dinan, instead of taking the customary
road to the railway station of Caulnes, we hired
a carriage, in order to visit the fortress castle of
La Hunaudaye, midway between Dinan and Lamballe.
The road lay by Jugon, a town prettily
situated in the cleft of two hills. On one once
<pb n="062"/><anchor id="Pg062"/>
stood an important castle, which gave rise to the
saying:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Qui a Bretagne sans Jugon,</q></l>
<l><q rend="post">A chape sans chaperon.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>Jugon is on the edge of two ponds. One of
them, the largest in Brittany, hangs suspended over
the town, as if threatening it with inundation. They
told us it was swarming with fish of every description,
and with pike of fabulous dimensions. Turning
off the road to the right, we entered the forest of
La Hunaudaye, and walked in a pouring rain to the
château, situated a short distance from the road. It
is of vast extent, has five round towers with ramparts
of cut stone, and is surrounded by walls with
machicolated parapets. It is a splendid ruin, but
the incessant rain prevented us from spending much
time in its examination. It was built in the thirteenth
century by Olivier de la Tournemine, and
was one of the strongest fortresses in Brittany.
Situated in the midst of a vast forest, its lord and
his retainers were the terror of the surrounding
country. No traveller passed untaxed; all were
compelled to pay toll. In 1504, the Bishop of
St. Brieuc complains to the Parliament at Rennes
that, regardless of the safeguard of the Duke, the
foresters of the Lord of La Hunaudaye had carried
off his horses, trunks, and baggage, and, a year
later, they had the audacity to stop the Queen-Duchess
<pb n="063"/><anchor id="Pg063"/>
Anne on her way to a pilgrimage to the
Folgoët. The Queen was conducted to the presence
of the Lord of La Hunaudaye, who maintained
to her that he had only exercised his right of
exacting a ransom from all who passed through the
forest without his permission, but that he waived his
privilege in favour of his Sovereign. Be that as it
may, he received her Majesty most royally, as the
old chaplain, Oliver de la Roche recounts, and gave
a splendid banquet, which he fully describes. The
table, he says, was four times covered with thirty-six
dishes of viands, and lastly, was brought in, "en
grande vénération," by eight squires, a whole calf,
standing on its legs, well seasoned, with an orange
in its mouth; and, when it appeared, the trumpets
sounded so loud that it seemed as if the walls shook.
On seeing the "dainty dish" that was "set before
the Queen," all wished to have a share; and the
chaplain relates, with great satisfaction, how he was
served himself twice by the Lord of La Hunaudaye.</p>

<p>The dark deeds of the lords of La Hunaudaye
have given rise to many a legend. The following is
a translation of one of the most popular:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><bibl><title rend="smallcaps; text-align: center">Legend of La Hunaudaye.</title></bibl></l>
<l rend="italic; margin-left:4">(Translation.)</l>
<lg>
<l><q rend="pre">When the rock eagle wakes,</q></l>
<l>And the towers of Hunaudaye</l>
<l>Gleam like three phantom forms</l>
<l>In the morning's sunlight ray;</l>
<pb n="064"/><anchor id="Pg064"/>
<l>When night her darksome wing</l>
<l>Folds round this desert waste,</l>
<l>Shun all this cursed ground&mdash;</l>
<l>Traveller flee thou in haste.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l><q rend="pre">There once&mdash;Great Heaven shield</q></l>
<l>Us all! and no ill arise&mdash;</l>
<l>There once&mdash;Hush! leave me not;</l>
<l>Hear you, from the ground, low sighs?&mdash;</l>
<l>There once&mdash;wrapped in the gloom</l>
<l>Of a dark and rainy night,</l>
<l>A man of haughty mien</l>
<l>Knocked at the door of might.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l><q rend="pre">'Open!' cried he,&mdash;it turns</q></l>
<l>On groaning hinge. The rain</l>
<l>Pours, but the frightened guards</l>
<l>Mark neither spot nor stain</l>
<l>On his purple cloak&mdash;nor his plumes</l>
<l>Droop wet, yet the torrents fall</l>
<l>Wildly and fast to night,</l>
<l>Beating the castle wall.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l><q rend="pre">The baron, stern and sad,</q></l>
<l>Was in his tower alone,</l>
<l>Pacing, with mailed heel,</l>
<l>Upon the echoing stone:</l>
<l>Cried he&mdash;'What stranger seeks,</l>
<l>This hour, my castle drear?</l>
<l>Ho! Oliver, Ho! Ralph,</l>
<l>See who intrudeth here.'</l>
</lg><lg>
<l><q rend="pre">'Heaven shield thee, baron brave!</q></l>
<l>A strange knight in the hall</l>
<l>Craves audience.' 'Lead him here:</l>
<l>Stay thou and Ralph in call,</l>
<l>At need.' Silent and slow</l>
<l>The purple-mantled knight,</l>
<l>Advancing, paused&mdash;his looks</l>
<l>Gleaming unearthly bright.</l>
</lg>
<pb n="065"/><anchor id="Pg065"/>
<lg>
<l><q rend="pre">'Who art thou coming thus,</q></l>
<l>Loud clamouring at my gate,</l>
<l>Thou truly puissant knight,</l>
<l>With not one squire for state?</l>
<l>Knowst thou at word of mine&mdash;'</l>
<l>The stranger knight smiled stern,</l>
<l>Replied in awful voice,</l>
<l>'Would'st thou my name? now learn:</l>
<l>Here is my train&mdash;behold!'</l>
<l>He cried. There hideous stood</l>
<l>One spectre, then two more&mdash;</l>
<l>A sight to chill the blood&mdash;</l>
<l>Unveiled their features pale,</l>
<l>All three in cere-cloth dressed,</l>
<l>Opening all wide to point</l>
<l>Where blood flowed from the breast.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l><q rend="pre">'Baron, these are my guard,'</q></l>
<l>Said the unknown&mdash;'Here, lo!</l>
<l>Thy father's aged form,</l>
<l>By poignard stroke laid low;</l>
<l>Here thy wife, cruelly slain</l>
<l>In the year thy brother fell;</l>
<l>They stand, pale, bleeding, stiff,&mdash;</l>
<l>Their murderer, can'st thou tell?'</l>
</lg><lg>
<l><q rend="pre">The phantoms three enlaced</q></l>
<l>The trembling baron round;</l>
<l>He vainly shrieked,&mdash;the walls</l>
<l>With demon laughs resound;</l>
<l>The echoing thunders rolled</l>
<l>Along the valley deep;</l>
<l>Lightnings, when pale dawn broke,</l>
<l>Blasted the castle keep.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l><q rend="pre">It stands a blackened pile;</q></l>
<l>The ruined gate is there.</l>
<l>But the sky lowers dark,</l>
<l>Oh! traveller flee, beware;</l>
<pb n="066"/><anchor id="Pg066"/>
<l>At this hour the shades of night</l>
<l>Brood o'er the solemn gloom.</l>
<l>Traveller, haste, oh! haste;</l>
<l><q rend="post">Leave this abode of doom.</q></l>
</lg></lg>

<p>It was in the forest of La Hunaudaye that the
Chouans of the Côtes du Nord were secretly exercised
and drilled by their chief, La Rouërie, under
the name of Gosselin, who died of horror on hearing
of the execution of thirteen of his confederates
betrayed by the physician Chaftal. Gosselin was
succeeded by the "Cid" of the Chouan chiefs, Boishardy,
called the "Sorcier," who, after his interview
with General Humbert, was betrayed and shot by
the "Bleus." For twelve years was Brittany cut off
from France by this Chouan war, an insurrection
even more formidable than that of La Vendée. The
peninsular position of Brittany, its vast extent of
coasts, its forests, its mountains, its people, speaking
a strange language, entirely under the subjection of
the priests, rendered it peculiarly adapted to carry
on a war against the republicans; a war, the whole
object of which was to upset all order, by preventing
the citizens from accepting office under the republic,
by punishing those who acquired national property,
by stopping couriers and all public conveyances,
destroying bridges, breaking up roads, assassinating
public officers, and executing horrible punishments
on those who sent provisions into the towns.</p>
<pb n="067"/><anchor id="Pg067"/>

<p>The castle of La Hunaudaye was destroyed by
order of the Commune of Lamballe, in 1793, that it
might not serve as a retreat for the Chouans.</p>

<p>We arrived very wet at Lamballe, a town most
picturesquely situated on the declivity of a granite
cliff, surmounted by a handsome church, rising from
the very edge of the rocks. It formed part of the
territory of the Duke of Penthièvre, whose heiress,
Jeanne la Boiteuse, married Charles of Blois, the
competitor with John de Montfort<note place="foot">
It may appear almost superfluous to refer to the cause of
the War of Succession, which for twenty years devastated
Brittany, and brought the armies of France and England
into the duchy. John III. died in 1341, leaving no children.
He had a brother Guy, Comte de Penthièvre, and a half-brother,
John de Montfort. Charles left the succession to
Charles de Châtillon, Comte de Blois, nephew of Philip
Augustus, King of France, who had married Jeanne, the only
daughter and heiress of Guy; but his half-brother, John de
Montfort, seized the duchy. The decision was referred to the
King of France, who gave it in favour of his relation Charles
of Blois. De Montfort sought the protection of the King of
England, whom he acknowledged as King of France, and
Edward III. readily gave him his support. It became no
longer the dispute of a province, but of two mighty nations, in
which the Kings of France, England, and Navarre took part,
and which was illustrated by the names of Chandos, Manny,
Du Guesclin and Clisson. The Bretons on the east of the
province sided with the French prince, those of the promontory
with the son of de Montfort. The battle of Auray, 1364,
decided the war in favour of De Montfort, but the contest
did not finally cease till the marriage of Anne de Bretagne to
Charles VIII. united the duchy to the French crown.
</note> for the dukedom
<pb n="068"/><anchor id="Pg068"/>
of Brittany. More tenacious of her rights than her
husband, Jeanne would never listen to any compromise.
After the treaty of Bretigny, the kings of
England and France proposed a division of the
duchy between the two rivals; but, intimidated by
his wife, Charles dared not consent; and again,
before the battle of Auray, when a division was
agreed upon, subject to the acceptance of the Countess,
Jeanne exclaimed, "My husband makes too
cheap a bargain of what is not his own." And she
wrote to Charles, "Do what you please. I am a
woman, and cannot do more; but I had rather lose
my life, or two if I had them, before I would consent
to so reproachable an act, to the shame of my
family" (<hi rend="italic">des miens</hi>). Later she said to him, "Preserve
me your heart, but preserve me also my duchy,
and, happen what may, act so that the sovereignty
remains to me entire." Her pride and obstinacy
cost her husband his life. The name of Lamballe
is associated with the memory of the unfortunate
Princesse de Savoie de Carignan, the sad victim of
revolutionary fury. On the death of her husband,
the Prince de Lamballe, the vast estates of the
Penthièvre family passed to his sister, the wife of
Philippe Egalité, and from her descended to Louis
Philippe, King of the French.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 17. Section of Lanleff Church.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image17.jpg">
    <head>17. Section of Lanleff Church.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>Next day we made an excursion to the famed
Temple of Lanleff, in Breton, the "land of tears,"
<pb n="069"/><anchor id="Pg069"/>
situated in a retired valley about six miles from the
sea. According to the tradition of the country, it
was built by "Les moines rouges," as they style the
Templar Knights. The road was incessantly up
and down hill, as we afterwards found they are
throughout Brittany; a "pays accidenté" it may
be truly called. The chapel of Lanleff is composed
of two concentric circular enclosures separated by
twelve round arches, with cushion-shaped capitals,
having heads, human and animal, rudely sculptured
upon them at the four angles. Its whole diameter
is about twenty-two feet. It was probably built
by some Templar Knight in the beginning of the
twelfth century on his return from the Holy Land.
The number of arches may allude to that of the
twelve Apostles.</p>
<pb n="070"/><anchor id="Pg070"/>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 18. Plan of Lanleff Church.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w25" url="images/image18.jpg">
    <head>18. Plan of Lanleff Church.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>The parish church was built into the east side of
the temple, the only part which has preserved its
roof, and which served as a
vestibule to the more modern
building. A gigantic yew
formerly grew in the central
enclosure, and overshadowed
it with its spreading branches;
but the parish church has
been taken down and rebuilt
in another part of the village,
and the yew-tree has disappeared.</p>

<p>Close to the temple is a spring enclosed by flagstones.
When moistened, they appear covered with
blood-stained spots. According to the tradition, in
olden times an unnatural father sold his child to the
Evil One. The gold received for the bargain was
counted out upon the side of the spring, and the
accursed money left its print upon the stones. A
bare-legged peasant who stood by with her pitcher,
threw some water over the stones, and immediately
there appeared round red spots of different sizes&mdash;indelible
marks of the diabolical bargain. We went
into a cottage close by, and had some boiled eggs
and cider. The inmates were at their meal&mdash;a bowl
of milk, into which they broke their buckwheat
"galette." We were much struck with the jealous
<pb n="071"/><anchor id="Pg071"/>
pertinacity of the Breton, to show he considers himself
as of a different people and country to the rest
of France, a feeling which more than three hundred
years has not dissipated. Our driver would talk of
Bretons and French as of distinct nations, and the
Normans in this part of Brittany are the special
objects of hatred, originating, perhaps, in the former
subjection of Brittany to Normandy. When Charles
the Simple ceded to the fierce Northmen the province
now known by their name, their sovereignty
extended over Brittany, and the dukes of Normandy
did homage for both provinces to the King of
France. The Bretons struggled hard against the
supremacy of the Barbarians, but eventually had
to acknowledge the Duke of Normandy as their
sovereign lord.</p>

<p>St. Brieuc, principal town of the department of
the Côtes-du-Nord, has been described as an old
town with a new face. Though one of the oldest in
Brittany, it has little of antiquity to detain the traveller.
The Palais de Justice is a handsome building,
in the midst of a pretty garden, commanding a
view of the Tour de Cesson, lower down the river
(the Gouët), a large circular tower built by Duke
John IV., and blown up by Henry IV., at the
desire of the Briochins, as the inhabitants of St.
Brieuc style themselves. The mine split it in two,
and the part that remains serves as a landmark for
<pb n="072"/><anchor id="Pg072"/>
the pilots between St. Brieuc and its port, about
two miles distant, called Légué. Notre Dame
d'Espérance is a pretty church, rebuilt about ten
years since, with a calvary in front, and a series of
painted windows representing the principal saints
of Brittany, and the most celebrated pilgrimages of
the Virgin in that province. At St. Brieuc, 1689,
James II. of England reviewed his little army, and
was received with royal honours by the bishop of
the place.</p>

<p>We proceeded by the railway to Guingamp, next
to St. Brieuc, the principal town of the department,
capital of the duchy of Penthièvre. It is situated
in the richly wooded and cultivated valley of the
Trieux, a favourite fishing river of considerable size,
and affording trout, salmon, and dace, from Guingamp
to Paimpol, where it falls into the sea, a distance
of twenty miles. It runs through the centre
of the town, and is here a considerable stream.</p>

<p>Attached to the Cathedral is the venerated sanctuary
of Notre Dame-du-Bon-Secours, one of the
most celebrated places of pilgrimage in Brittany.
The pardon takes place the Saturday before the first
Sunday in July, and owes its origin to the brotherhood
called the "Frérie blanche," an association of
which Duke Peter accepted the title of lay-abbot.
The motto embroidered on their banner was (in
Breton) "A triple cord is not easily broken." The
<pb n="073"/><anchor id="Pg073"/>
triple cord being emblematic of the three estates&mdash;clergy,
nobles, and laity&mdash;in whose unity consisted
the strength of Brittany. The Frérie blanche no
longer exists, the triple cable is broken, the pilgrimage
alone remains.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 19. Fountain of Duke Peter.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image19.jpg">
    <head>19. Fountain of Duke Peter.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>La Pompe, or the fountain of Duke Peter, as it is
<pb n="074"/><anchor id="Pg074"/>
called, is of later dater date, being in the style of the
Renaissance. It consists of three circular basins in
tiers. On the lower are sea-horses, which, with their
wings, support the second basin, and Naiads uphold
the third. On the top is a figure of the Virgin with
her arms extended.</p>

<p>The women of Guingamp wear high muslin caps,
dark petticoats, and black stockings. Knitting-pins
in hand, they work away at their stockings whether
walking, talking, or with a load of butter on their
heads, as they do throughout all Brittany. When
not at work, their knitting-pins are stuck in their
hair. Knitting and spinning are the occupation of
their lives. When the Breton's idol, Du Guesclin,
was a prisoner to the Black Prince, and was asked how
he could raise the large sum named for his ransom,
Du Guesclin replied, that "the women of Brittany
would rather spin for a year and ransom him with
their distaffs, than that he should remain prisoner."</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Quand vous étiez captif, Bertrand, fils de Bretagne,</q></l>
<l>Tous les fuseaux tournaient aussi dans la campagne;</l>
<l>Chaque femme apporte son écheveau de lin;</l>
<l><q rend="post">Ce fut votre rançon, messire Du Guesclin!</q></l>

<l rend="right"><bibl>
 <title rend="italic">Les Bretons</title>,
 <author rend="smallcaps">A. Brizeux</author>.
</bibl></l></lg>

<p>Guingamp was given by Duke John V. to his son
Peter, who resided here and rebuilt the castle. When
attacked by his mortal illness, the physicians attributed
his malady to witchcraft, and declared it could
<pb n="075"/><anchor id="Pg075"/>
only be remedied by counter-spells. The Prince
refused to have recourse to such means, saying,
"I had rather die by the will of God, than live by
the will of the Devil."&mdash;"J'aime mieux mourir de
par Dieu, que de vivre de par le Diable."</p>

<p>We walked to the small chapel of St. Léonard,
picturesquely situated on a little eminence. It was
built by Charles of Blois, on his return from his
captivity in England, and dedicated by him to St.
Léonard, the patron-saint of prisoners&mdash;a contemporary
of Clovis, from whom he obtained permission
to set free all the captives he should find in the
prisons. In the month of May, people who are
attacked with fever repair to St. Léonard to seek,
upon the walls of the chapel or on the calvary
attached to it, snails as cures for their malady.
They must gather them themselves, pound them,
and put them into little bags, which they wear round
their necks. As soon as the fever leaves them they
bury their bags at the foot of the walls of the chapel,
and, if they fail to perform this ceremony, the fever
will return. We found quantities of these bags,
made of coarse linen, lying half-buried under the
walls of the chapel. There is a pardon here every
year, on which occasion only the chapel is opened.</p>

<p>We took a carriage to Paimpol. On our way we
stopped at the Château de Boisgelin, belonging to
the Marquis of the same name, but could not obtain
<pb n="076"/><anchor id="Pg076"/>
admittance. On to the Abbey of Beauport (Sancta
Maria de Bello Porto), founded in the thirteenth
century, beautifully situated on a tongue of land at
the entrance of the Bay of Paimpol, opposite the
island of Saint-Rion. In its large garden, which
extends down to the sea, are planted myrtles, figs,
mulberries, and other trees of the south of Europe.
Beauport has been called the Chartreuse of Brittany.
It is a lovely secluded spot, as, indeed, are most of
the sites of the old abbeys, varying in aspect, but
always beautiful. No description can give an idea
of the magnificent panoramic views from the walls
of the abbey.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 20. Abbey of Beauport.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image20.jpg">
    <head>20. Abbey of Beauport.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>M. Merimée justly observes, "It appears strange
that, in so early a stage of civilisation, the monks
should be so alive to the beauties of nature. The
contemplative habits of monastic life must at all
times have imparted to the mind a feeling of abstract
beauty, independent of any idea of real utility. Secure
of an uniform, peaceful existence, limited in
his pleasures and his ambition, sheltered by his sacred
office, above others, from the reverses of fortune,
the monk of the thirteenth century was in a position
to love, and did love, beauty for itself. And while
the knight, at war with all the world, thought only
on building an impregnable fortress, the abbot embellished
his dwelling, and tasted the enjoyments
afforded by imagination and the arts. "The abbey
<pb n="077"/><anchor id="Pg077"/>
<pb n="078"/><anchor id="Pg078"/>
<pb n="079"/><anchor id="Pg079"/>
of Beauport is built in the pointed style, and is a
perfect example of the monastic architecture of the
thirteenth century&mdash;the most important and most
beautiful convent ruins in Brittany. The original
disposition of its buildings may yet be clearly traced.
These abbeys were all built upon the same plan.
In the centre was the square garden (préau), surrounded
by the cloisters. On the south side the
church, extending from west to east; on the north,
the refectory, with the kitchen attached. On the
east was the chapter-house, and some small apartments;
above these were the dormitories. Outside
was the interior court, reserved for the brethren, and
beyond, the great court, into which the provisions
were brought, and round which were the stables and
farm buildings. The garden, orchard, mill, oven,
dovecote, cider-press, &amp;c., were all within the walled
enclosure, for the abbeys were not merely convents
dedicated solely to devotional exercises. After prayer
followed labour. The Breton abbeys were quite
model farms; the woods and the commons afforded
the means of rearing cattle to those who had the
privilege of pasturage in the forests. Many had
also the right of acorns and beech-mast for their
pigs (<hi rend="italic">droit au gland et à la faîne</hi>). One abbey,
that of Morimond (Haute Marne), is recorded to
have had twenty piggeries, of three hundred pigs
each, distributed in its forests. The monks also
<pb n="080"/><anchor id="Pg080"/>
reared sheep and horses, and fattened fish in their
ponds. They were the first who advanced the
science of horticulture and the cultivation of vegetables.
To these agricultural pursuits were added,
in many convents, the industrial arts, and some of
the brethren were brewers, curriers, fullers, weavers,
shoemakers, carpenters, and blacksmiths. Their
cultivation of the liberal arts and sciences is well
known. During the Middle Ages the monasteries
were the sole depositories of learning. Beauport is
now occupied by a Polish lady, Countess Poninsky,
who allows no one to enter the abbey, as her husband
was buried in the church.</p>

<p>Two or three miles further we reached Paimpol,
where we remained the night, at a nice hotel.
Paimpol is a seaport town prettily situated in a
cultivated country on the bay that bears its name.
Its inhabitants are employed in the mackerel
and Iceland fisheries. The women about here
wear close straw-bonnets. They all, in this department,
ride on horseback, "à califourchon," like
the men.</p>

<p>We hired our carriage on to Tréguier. At
Lézardrieux we passed the estuary of the Trieux,
over a magnificent suspension-bridge, at a considerable
elevation above the water, vessels sail under it.
It was built 1840, and is 833 feet long, that is, 167
longer than the famed bridge of La Roche Bernard
<pb n="081"/><anchor id="Pg081"/>
(Loire Inférieure). The bridge swung frightfully
when we passed over it. In the churchyard of
Pleudaniel is a pretty granite calvary, and skulls are
placed in recesses in the wall on each side of the
church-porch.</p>

<p>We next came to the Château of La Roche
Jagu, on the summit of a hill overhanging the
river Trieux and defending the entrance. It has
more of the character of a "maison forte" than of
a "manoir," as was termed the habitation of a
knight, and of those who holding a fief, yet did
not possess the seignorial right to a castle with
towers and donjon. The manoir might be enclosed
by walls and moats, but not with towers. The entrance
on the side opposite to the river is through
a large walled court by a low Gothic doorway,
closed by an enormous iron grating of upright and
horizontal bars of great thickness, hanging on four
hinges, and secured by four locks; all the windows
have gratings of the same kind. A stone staircase
leads to the one story, consisting of a suite of large
rooms half lighted by narrow windows. Some of
these are occupied by the keeper of the castle and
others are reserved for the use of the proprietor, the
Marquis d'Argentré, and, when he goes there, are
decorated and partly furnished with the pieces of
old tapestry lying about. At the end of these
rooms is a turret, which communicates with a
<pb n="082"/><anchor id="Pg082"/>
covered gallery surmounting the whole length of the
façade facing the river, and commanding a beautiful
view of the windings of the silvery Trieux
and of its fir-clothed banks. This gallery is furnished
with battlements, and served the double
purpose of a rampart and an observatory. The
wall on the river-side is fifteen feet thick, and a
chapel hewn in the thickness of the wall is lighted
by a Gothic window looking over the Trieux.
Fourteen elegant chimney-shafts of cut stone, cylindrical
in form, and ornamented with iron spikes,
give a most original character to the building.
The château belonged to the Maréchal Duc de
Richelieu, who sold it in 1773 to the Tressan family,
under the stipulation that its subterranean passages
should not be explored. They are said to extend
under the bed of the river to the Château of Frinandour,
half a league distant.</p>

<p>We next passed through Pontrieux, a pretty,
small town, seated in a deep valley, the river Trieux
flowing through it. The river here is famous for
salmon, and there is a considerable commerce in its
little port.</p>

<p>La Roche-Derrien on the Jaudy, during the
War of Succession in Brittany, was a castle of some
celebrity. It was here Charles of Blois was taken
prisoner by the English, who, under Sir Thomas
Dagworth, were in possession of the place. Charles
<pb n="083"/><anchor id="Pg083"/>
of Blois assembled a large army, and attacked them
by night. Three times was he rescued, and three
times retaken; he had received eighteen wounds,
and was at last compelled to surrender. Jeanne de
Montfort, like all women who hate, was very vindictive,
and caused her illustrious prisoner to be
ignominiously dragged to Quimperlé, Vannes, and
Hennebont, whence he was transferred to London,
and confined in the Tower. It was nine years
before he regained his liberty.  Meanwhile his
heroic wife, Jeanne de Penthièvre, became head of
his party, as Jeanne de Flandre was that of the
De Montfort. The "War of the two Jeannes"
continued for nine years, during which they fought
with fierceness and courage, and ruled with ability.
Curious,&mdash;the history of France was illustrated in
this century by five heroines of the name of Jeanne:
Jeanne d'Arc, Jeanne Hachette of Beauvais, and
the Jeannes of Penthièvre, Flandre, and Clisson,
who made themselves famous in Brittany. On his
release, Charles of Blois gave La Roche-Derrien to
Du Guesclin.  The castle was demolished, but a
calvary has been built on the site.</p>

<p>Not far from La Roche-Derrien is the church of
Langoat, which contains the monument of Ste.
Pompée (1370), mother of St. Tugdual. On the
granite tomb reposes her marble effigy, and around
it bas-reliefs in Gothic niches represent the life of the
<pb n="084"/><anchor id="Pg084"/>
saint. In all the churches in this district, tressels
are placed in the nave ready for funerals. The
gravestones have in each a little hollow well, to
contain water for sprinkling over the grave, or in
some a small basin is set upon the gravestone, with
a sprig of box laid by the side, for the same pious
purpose.</p>

<p>Every one must be struck by the excellence of
the roads in Brittany, as indeed throughout France;
in no instance does the French administrative talent
more fully display itself. The roads are of three
classes: the "routes impériales," under the care of
the Government; "départementales," kept entirely
at the expense of the department; and the "chemins
vicinaux," which belong to the communes or
parishes, and which all the inhabitants are called
upon to support. To each lieue de poste (two and
a half miles), is appointed a "cantonnier" or road-keeper,
who is responsible for the condition of the
length of road assigned to his care.</p>

<p>We stopped at Kermartin, a farmhouse near
Tréguier, to see the bed said to have belonged to
St. Ives, the favourite saint of the Bretons, and
whose name is borne by the majority of the inhabitants
of the district of Tréguier and St. Brieuc.
Charles of Blois held him in great veneration. He
gave part of a rib of St. Ives to the church at Lamballe,
and carried the relic in procession barefooted to
<pb n="085"/><anchor id="Pg085"/>
the church. Before the battle of Auray, he ordered
his men to march "in the name of God and St.
Yves."</p>

<p>St. Ives, or Yves Hélory, was one of the most
remarkable characters of the thirteenth century.
He studied law in the schools of Paris, and applied
his talents in defending the cause of the poor;
hence he was called "the poor man's advocate;"
and so great to this day is the confidence placed in
his justice, that, in the department of the Côtes-du-Nord,
when a debtor falsely denies his debt, a
peasant will pay twenty sous for a mass to St. Yves,
convinced that St. Yves will cause the faithless
creditor to die within the year. His truthfulness
was such, he was called St. Yves de Verité. He is
the special patron of lawyers, and always represented
in the "mortier," or lawyer's cap, with an
ermine-trimmed scarlet robe.</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Saint Yves était Breton,</q></l>
<l>Avocat et pas larron,</l>
<l><q rend="post">Chose rare, se dit-on.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>Lawyers, says a writer, take him for a patron, but
not for a model. Philip le Hardi, in acknowledgment
of his worth, granted him a pension of six
deniers a day&mdash;in those times a considerable sum.</p>

<p>Over this house is a marble tablet with this inscription:&mdash;</p>
<pb n="086"/><anchor id="Pg086"/>

<p rend="small; text-align: center">
<q rend="pre">Ici est né le 17 Oct^r 1253, et est mort le 19 Mai 1303,</q></p>

<p rend="smallcaps; text-align: center">Saint Yves,</p>

<p rend="small">
<q rend="post">Officiel de Tréguier, curé de Tredretz et de Lohannec. Sa
maison, qui a subsisté jusqu'en l'année 1834, ayant été alors
demolie à cause de vetusté, Mg^r Hyacinthe Louis de Quelen,
Arch^vque de Paris, et propriétaire des domaines de Kermartin,
a fait placer cette inscription, afin qu'un lieu sanctifié par la
presence d'un si grand serviteur de Dieu ne demeurât pas
inconnu (1837).</q></p>

<p>The house is a good specimen of a Breton dwelling;
by the side of the fire, in the one room of
which most of these cottages consist, fixed against
the wall like the berth of a ship, stands the bedstead
or "lit clos" of old oak, shut in by carved and
well-waxed sliding panels, often inscribed with the
sacred monogram.  The two mattresses, paillasse,
and "cossette de plume," are piled up to such a
height as barely to admit of its tenants creeping into
the bed. In front is the customary chest, containing
the family wardrobe, answering the double purpose
of a seat and the means of ascending into the bed.
Often we have seen cupboards on each side of the
large chimney with two shelves, which served as
beds for the juvenile members of the family. Forms
and a polished table complete the furniture; the
last has frequently little wells hollowed in the top,
used, instead of plates, to hold the soup. Over the
table, suspended by pulleys, are two indispensable
articles in a Breton dwelling&mdash;a large circular basket
<pb n="087"/><anchor id="Pg087"/>
to cover the bread, and a kind of wooden frame
or rack, round which the spoons are ranged. Forks
they do not use. Festoons of sausages, with hams,
bacon, candles, skins of lard, onions, horse-shoes,
harness, all hang suspended from the ceiling, which
consists of fagots of hazel suspended by cross-poles.
The floor is of beaten earth. One narrow window
admits the light, and there are no outhouses. The
manure-heap is generally at the house-door, and
the pigs and poultry seem on an equally intimate
footing as they are in our Irish cabins. The
Breton's cottage has often no garden, to occupy his
leisure hours; and the men, after their daily work,
resort to the cabaret to spend their time and their
earnings. Agriculture is very backward in Brittany,
but the land produces abundance of corn. It
is thrashed out direct from the field, on a clay floor
(aire). Beet-root and clover grow very luxuriantly,
and in some fields the pretty red clover (<hi rend="italic">Trifolium
incarnatum</hi>) carpets the country with its crimson
flowers.</p>

<p>Near the farmhouse of Kermartin is the parish
church of Minihy-Tréguier, formerly a chapel
founded by St. Ives and attached to the "manoir."
The will of St. Ives is framed and hung up in the
church, and his breviary is also preserved here; but
the guide said it was now kept at the priest's house, as
people were in the habit of taking away a leaf as a
<pb n="088"/><anchor id="Pg088"/>
relic. Minihy, <hi rend="italic">i. e.</hi> Monk's House, is a name given
to those places which, through the intercession of
some saint, had the right of sanctuary. They were
marked with a red cross, and, how great soever the
crime, were regarded as inviolable. In 1441 the
right of sanctuary was restricted to churches;
before, it was extended to towns and districts.
Tréguier had the privilege within a radius of twelve
miles from the town. St. Malo also possessed the
right of sanctuary. Tréguier is one of the four
bishoprics that formed the ancient divisions of
Brittany. The others were Léon, Cornouaille, and
Vannes. The "pays de Tréguier" answers exactly
to the present department of the Côtes-du-Nord;
Léon to the territory or arrondissement of Brest and
Morlaix; Cornouaille has Quimper and Carhaix
for its principal towns; and Vannes, the country of
Celtic remains, is to the south.</p>

<p>Tréguier is prettily situated on a hill, at the confluence
of the rivers Jaudy and Guindy; its principal
building is the beautiful, imposing cathedral, with
its elegant spire, begun in the thirteenth century by
St. Yves, and dedicated to St. Tugdual, whose name,
like St. Yves, is often given in baptism to the
Breton children. St. Yves is buried here, and also
Duke John V., who founded the Chapelle du Duc,
and desired to be interred at the feet of St. Yves,
for whom he had a special regard, and to whom he
<pb n="089"/><anchor id="Pg089"/>
erected a magnificent tomb, for three centuries the
object of veneration in Brittany. The Duke paid
for it his own weight in silver (389 marks 7 oz.),
in 1424, to Maistre Jacques de Hougue. The victories
of his father John the Conqueror were chased
in bas-relief round the tomb, which was destroyed
in 1793. Duke John V. was a contemptible prince,
who eight times changed his party from weakness
rather than policy, and on whom Margaret de
Clisson and her sons retaliated the cowardly seizure
of her father, the Constable Clisson, by Duke
John IV. One of the towers of the cathedral is
called the tower of Hastings, but its date is evidently
subsequent to that of the Norman freebooter. The
cathedral has preserved its beautiful cloisters, the
work of the fifteenth century, although it has been
ravaged by the Normans of the ninth century, the
English in the fourteenth, the Spaniards in the sixteenth,
and by the Revolutionists of 1793. It was
the port chosen by the Constable Clisson, 1387, for
the invasion of England, an expedition proposed
and projected by himself. His hatred against the
English was so great, though educated in England,
he was termed the "boucher des Anglais." When
the Duke of Brittany gave Chandos the château
of Gavre, which was within a league of Clisson's
château of Blain (Loire Inférieure), "I will never,"
he exclaimed, "be the neighbour of the English,"
<pb n="090"/><anchor id="Pg090"/>
and accordingly he sallied out one morning and
burnt the castle to the ground. Chandos complained
to the Black Prince, who sent a letter of
remonstrance to Clisson, but it was only replied
by a challenge to the Prince to meet him in single
combat. Clisson caused his own ship to be built at
Tréguier, and had constructed a tower or framework
of large timber, to be put together on his
landing in England, for the lords to retreat to as
a place of safety, and to be lodged therein securely
in the event of a night attack. This tower, Froissart
says, was so constructed, that when dislodged
it could be taken to pieces, and many carpenters
and other workmen were engaged, at very high
wages, to go with it to England to superintend
the putting of it together. Four thousand men-at-arms
and 2000 cross-bowmen were in readiness
for the expedition, with horses, vessels laden with
wine, salted provisions, and other necessaries. All
these formidable preparations were rendered useless
by the arrest of the Constable the day before his
embarkation. We went to the Cemetery, which
has its ossuary, reliquary, or bone-house, an inseparable
appendage to a Breton churchyard. It is
the custom in Brittany, after a certain time, to dig
up the bones of the dead, and preserve their skulls
in little square boxes, like dog-kennels, with a
heart-shaped opening through which the skull is
<pb n="091"/><anchor id="Pg091"/>
visible. They are all ticketed with the names and
dates of the deceased, as "Ci gît le chef de * * *
D. c. D. (décédé) le * * * * *. Priez Dieu pour
son âme."</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 21. Skull-box.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w25" url="images/image21.jpg">
    <head>21. Skull-box.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>These boxes sometimes occupy prominent places
inside the churches or porch, on window
sills, the capitals of columns, and
other ledges; but more often are
ranged in the ossuaries or charnel-houses
built in the churchyards to
receive them, with a row of death's-heads
carved in the stone outside.
The large bones are also placed in the ossuaire. The
rich are buried in "enfeux" or arched recesses in
the chapels or abbeys they have founded.</p>

<p>We continued our carriage to Lannion, our driver
not very clear of his way, and in Brittany the road
is very difficult to be discerned; for on each side
are high earthen banks, sometimes eight or ten feet
high, and on the top of these are planted timber-trees,
such as oak, elm, and ash, which often meet
at the top, entirely intercepting the view, making
these narrow lanes a perfect slough and most intricate
to thread. Sometimes they are cut in irregular
steps in the solid rock, and serve for the bed
of a stream. Each field is also surrounded by these
hedgerow-trees, which are cut every four or five
years.</p>
<pb n="092"/><anchor id="Pg092"/>

<p>We drove to Perros Guirec, a lovely little
watering-place built on a small promontory with a
safe harbour, whence wheat, hemp, and cattle are
exported to England; it is six miles from Lannion.
A dangerous rock, called Roche Bernard, is at its
entrance. The view is lovely. From Perros we
scrambled over a hilly cart-road to Ploumanach,
about three miles distant&mdash;a wonderful spot, huge
round erratic blocks of pink granite flung over land
and sea in the wildest confusion. The whole coast
is one sea of boulders, a chaos of rocks of all sizes
cover the soil in every direction, and in many
places there is no soil at all, and the loose masses
rest on a bare bed of rock, stretching, in unbroken
extent, to a great distance. "A wanderer," says
Mr. Trollope, "amid this strange and silent scene
might fancy himself the only living thing in the
midst of a world turned to stone. In every possible
variety of uncouth form and capricious, strange
positions, the endless masses were around us."</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">All is rocks at random thrown,</q></l>
<l><q rend="post">Black waves, bare crags, and banks of stone."</q></l>
<l rend="right"><bibl>
 <author rend="smallcaps">Lord of the Isles</author>.
</bibl></l></lg>

<p>One rock, surrounded at high water by the tide,
is a square block of red granite of thirty to forty
feet high, placed on the top of a still higher mass,
on which it rests upon a very small base. It is
called the "Roche Pendue," and serves as a landmark
<pb n="093"/><anchor id="Pg093"/>
for the fishermen. We took a small boat
full of fish resembling codlings or small cod, called
"lieu," and were rowed by the fishermen through
a sea of granite boulders to the opposite side of the
Trégastel estuary, to see the "pierre pendue," or
rocking-stone (Breton, <hi rend="italic">rouler</hi>), the largest in Brittany.
These stones are so nicely poised that they
can be moved with the <corr sic="slighest">slightest</corr> impulse by any one
knowing the exact point at which to touch them.
They were used in early times as proving-stones,
and called "Pierres de verité."</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l rend="right"><q rend="pre">Firm as it seems,</q></l>
<l>Such is its strange and virtuous property,</l>
<l>It moves obsequious to the gentlest touch</l>
<l>Of him whose breast is pure; but to a traitor,</l>
<l>Though e'en a giant's prowess nerved his arm,</l>
<l><q rend="post">It stands as fixed as Snowdon.</q>
&mdash;<bibl><author rend="smallcaps">Mason</author></bibl>.</l>
</lg>

<p>Or, as Sir Walter Scott alludes to them,&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l rend="margin-left: 2"><q rend="pre">Some, chance-poised and balanced, lay</q></l>
<l>So that a stripling arm might sway</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">A mass no host could raise,</l>
<l>In nature's rage at random thrown,</l>
<l>Yet trembling like the Druid's Stone,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2"><q rend="post">On its precarious base.</q>
&mdash;<bibl><author rend="smallcaps">Lord of the Isles.</author></bibl></l>
</lg>

<p>The council of Nantes, in the seventh century,
ordered the bishops to have the rocking-stones
destroyed. The coarse rose-coloured granite of this
coast resembles the Egyptian.</p>

<p>We rowed back to the little inn at Ploumanach,
<pb n="094"/><anchor id="Pg094"/>
and had some eggs and a hot langouste or rock-lobster.
This kind is more plentiful on the coast
of Brittany than the common, but these rocky
shores abound in both sorts. The village of Ploumanach
is built nearly into the sea, in the midst of
rocks overhanging the harbour. It is almost exclusively
frequented by fishermen; in the front is a
group of rocks or islands called Les Sept Iles; the
Ile aux Moines, the most important among them,
is strongly fortified, and is directly opposite Ploumanach.
At the inn we found a German artist
employed in making sketches in oil of this strange
coast. It was late when we reached Lannion, a
town prettily situated in the valley of Leguer; it
contains no remarkable buildings except a few
houses of the period of Henry IV. and Louis XIII.
in the market-place. The mackerel and other
fisheries are carried on from here, the grande and
petite pêche, the "lieu" is taken in shoals and salted.
The seaweed or wrack (<hi rend="italic">Fucus vesiculosus</hi>) called
goëmon, is extensively collected along the coasts of
Brittany for fertilising the lands and also for fuel,
which last is so scarce that even cow-dung is collected
and dried against the walls for the same use. The
gathering of goëmon takes place in March and September,
and employs the whole population of the
district. Souvestre says, that on the appointed day
for gathering the crop, horses, oxen, cows, dogs,
<pb n="095"/><anchor id="Pg095"/>
every animal, and every machine, is put into requisition.
Women and children all are assembled in
the bays, sometimes to the number of 10,000
persons; but, to allow the poor to have the full
advantage, the custom is, on the first day, to admit
only the necessitous of the parish. These borrow
their neighbours' vehicles, and collect a good crop.
It is called "the day of the poor." The goëmon
grows on rocks at a distance from the shore, and
the peasants not having sufficient boats to collect it
tie the heaps together with cords on to branches of
trees and form a raft, on which the whole family is
launched; a barrel is attached at the end, and the
unsteady craft often rolls over and its cargo is
precipitated into the water. The fine sands of the
sea shore are also carted and laid on the heavy
lands to divide the soil. Ascending the valley of
the Leguer, about eight miles from Lannion, on the
opposite side of the river, we turned down a muddy
lane, and getting out into a field saw in front of us
the imposing castle of Tonquédec, perhaps the
finest remains in Brittany of military architecture,
dating from the fourteenth century. It crowns the
summit of a hill, wooded down to the river's edge,
with water-mills and a little village at the foot, the
bright sparkling river running through the deep
wild valley; nothing can exceed the picturesque
effect of these ruins when seen from the
<pb n="096"/><anchor id="Pg096"/>
opposite bank. Tonquédec has belonged from
time immemorial to the Viscomtes de Coêtmen,
who held the first rank among the nobles of
Brittany, but one of them espousing the cause
of the Constable Clisson against Duke John IV.
saw his fortress demolished. It was restored under
Henry IV., and again dismantled by order of
Cardinal Richelieu, who hated castles and their
nobility. The castle is an irregular four-sided
figure. It had an outer enclosure, and was entered
by a drawbridge, and furnished with every imaginable
fortification. Three sides were surrounded
by dwellings, among these a fine roofed salle d'armes
remains. A flying bridge led to the keep, which
was of four stories, but the entrance on the first
story, so that in case of siege the garrison might
retire to the keep, and hold out till want of provisions
or ammunition compelled them to surrender.
The towers and walls remain, the latter are ten feet
thick.</p>

<p>On our way to Plouaret we drove up to the
château of Kergrist, a square edifice with pepper-box
towers at each angle, in good preservation,
occupied by a lady of the name of Douglas. Our
driver could not find the way to the "Chapelle des
Sept Saints," built over a dolmen, which lay near
the station at Plouaret, whence we proceeded by
rail, and, entering the department of Finistère,
<pb n="097"/><anchor id="Pg097"/>
shortly after reached Morlaix over its magnificent
granite viaduct, the most important among the
many which occur between Rennes and Brest. The
railway runs parallel to the coast, and traverses, not
far from their mouths, the streams which abound
in this "pays accidenté." This gigantic work is
one-sixth of a mile (292 yards) long, and consists
of two tiers of arches, fourteen in the upper line
and nine below.</p>

<p>Morlaix is picturesquely built on the sides of
three ravines, so steep that the saying goes, "De la
mansarde au jardin, comme on dit à Morlaix." It is
situated on a tidal river, about eight miles from the
sea, ascended by small vessels, which give the place a
lively appearance. Few towns have so many beautiful
timbered houses of the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries remaining. One of the most curious is that
belonging to a miller, No. 19, in the Rue des Nobles,
a street where the houses are built one story projecting
over the other, so that the top stories of the
opposite houses nearly touch each other and exclude
the light. The fronts, gable-shaped, have their
enormous beams richly carved, and supported by
brackets and statues of St. Yves or other favourite
saints; some are overlaid with lozenge-shaped slates,
and finished at the point with a leaden "épi," or
ornamental terminal. All have a kind of hall,
panelled and sculptured to the roof, the staircases
<pb n="098"/><anchor id="Pg098"/>
richly sculptured and supported by a pillar carved
from top to bottom with statues of saints or grotesque
figures superposed one over the other.
Among the statuettes in the house, No. 19, are the
figures of St. Roch and his dog; St. Christopher
carrying the infant Jesus, St. Michael, and various
others. On another staircase, in better preservation,
but not so richly carved (at the Veuve Perron's, No.
14, Grande Rue), are female saints,&mdash;the Virgin, St.
Catherine, and St. Barbara.</p>

<p>Morlaix gave a grand reception to the Queen-Duchess
Anne, when on her pilgrimage through
Brittany in 1505. The town presented her with a
little ship of gold, bearing the arms of the city, and
enriched with precious stones, and a tame ermine
with a diamond collar round its neck. Anne
received the ermine, and caressed the little animal,
who returned her endearments, and, at length,
suddenly concealed itself in her bosom, which unexpected
proceeding startled the Queen, when the
Seigneur du Rohan, who was by her side, exclaimed,
"What do you fear, madam; is not the
ermine your cognisance?" No less enthusiastic
was the reception given by the citizens of Morlaix
forty years later (1548) to Mary Stuart, then only
five years old, on her landing in France. She was
lodged in the convent of the Jacobins, and assisted
at the Te Deum in the church of Notre Dame-du-Mur.
<pb n="099"/><anchor id="Pg099"/>
When passing through one of the gates
on her way back, the drawbridge, overloaded with
spectators, gave way, and several persons were
thrown into the water. Mary's Scottish attendants
cried out "Treason!" but the Seigneur de Rohan,
who was on horseback by the side of the royal
litter, indignantly exclaimed, "Jamais Breton ne
fit trahison." The loyalty and good faith of the
Bretons is proverbial. "En tout chemin, loyauté,"
is a Breton motto,<note place="foot">E pess hænt lealdet!</note>
and it is one of the virtues attributed
to them by a Breton writer, who assigns to
them four virtues and three vices. Their virtues
consist in a love of their country and their home,
resignation to the will of the Almighty, loyalty to
each other, and hospitality. Their vices are avarice,
contempt for women, and drunkenness. Their love
of country and home is carried to an extent,
rivalling, if not exceeding, that of the Swiss. The
Breton not only loves the village where he was
born, but he loves the field of his fathers, the
hearth and the clock of his home, even the bed on
which he was born, and on which he hopes to close
his eyes. The conscript and sailor are often known
to die of grief when away from their native land.
Brittany possesses for its children an inconceivable
attraction, and there is no country in the
<pb n="100"/><anchor id="Pg100"/>
world where man is more attached to his native
soil.</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">O landes! ô forêts! pierres sombres et hautes,</q></l>
<l>Bois qui couvrez nos champs, mers qui battez nos côtes,</l>
<l>Villages où les morts errent avec les vents,</l>
<l><q rend="post">Bretagne, d'où vient l'amour de tes enfants?</q>
&mdash;<bibl><author rend="smallcaps">Brizeux.</author></bibl></l>
</lg>

<p>The Bretons are brave soldiers and good sailors;
their disposition is hasty and violent, and even
ferocious in anger. When the people of Nantes
rose up in rebellion against Duke Francis, his
brother-in-law, the Comte du Foix, sent to pacify
them, said to him on his return from his mission,
"J'aimerais mieux être prince d'un million de
sangliers que de tel peuple que sont vos Bretons"&mdash;Brittany
has always been the theatre of great virtues
and great crimes.</p>

<p>On Sunday we went to the Welsh Baptist Chapel,
to hear Mr. Jenkins preach in the Breton language.
He has been there thirty years zealously labouring
among the peasants, to convert whom he was sent
by the Welsh Baptist Missionary Society. From
his thorough knowledge of the French and Breton
languages, he is eminently fitted for the task. He
travels about the surrounding country preaching,
and establishing schools, and has revised the Breton<note
place="foot">By Légonedec.</note>
translation of the New Testament for the Society,
and circulated, by means of colporteurs, from eight
<pb n="101"/><anchor id="Pg101"/>
to nine thousand Bibles, besides above 100,000
tracts. The task of acquiring the Breton language
is less difficult for a Welshman, for the similarity
between them is so great that the two people are
able to make themselves understood to each other.
The labours of Mr. Jenkins have lately awakened the
attention of the Breton Roman Catholic clergy, who
have publicly denounced him from their altars, but
without causing him to slacken in the good work
he has undertaken. Persecuted by a tyrannical
priesthood, who hold dominion over a peasantry
bigoted in proportion to their ignorance, his position
is one of difficulty and danger; but he goes
on with undrooping energy, convinced that, though
the progress is slow, the good seed has not been
sown in vain, and will, in due time, bear fruit,
though those who first sowed it may have passed
away. There were about a dozen Bretons at the
evening service; they seemed to be constantly
going in and out, as if unable to keep up their
attention to so long a service. There are also
English Protestant chapels at Morlaix and Quimper,
and French at Brest and Lorient.</p>

<p>We saw a christening in the cathedral, of a child
about eighteen months old; the mother wore a
wonderful conical cap of lace.</p>

<p>A few houses from our hotel a ball was going on,
given every week for the workpeople of the town.
<pb n="102"/><anchor id="Pg102"/>
The clatter of their iron-pointed wooden shoes
seemed quite to drown the music.</p>

<p>Next day we walked to the Fontaine des Anglais,
so-called from the slaughter of a body of English
at that place. Jealous of the prosperity of Morlaix,
Henry VIII. sent a fleet up the river to attack the
place, and the commander, being informed by a
spy of the absence of the chief nobles at Guingamp,
and of the townsmen at the fair of Pontivy, landed
with a force which entered Morlaix, burnt it, and
returned laden with booty to their boats. Six or
seven hundred men, who were intoxicated, fell
asleep in the wood, where they were attacked by the
nobles, who had hastened from Guingamp to
the assistance of the town, and were all massacred.
The neighbouring fountain, said to have been
tinged with the invaders' blood, received in memory
of the event the name of "Fontaine des Anglais."
It was on this occasion the town of Morlaix added
to its arms, a lion (emblem of vigilance), encountering
a two-headed leopard (for England), with the
punning motto, "S'ils te mordent, mors-les"
(Morlaix).</p>

<p>Emile Souvestre, author of 'Le Foyer Breton,'
and 'Les Derniers Bretons,' the ablest portrayer of
Breton manners, customs, and superstitions, was a
native of Morlaix; he died in the Protestant Communion,
1854.</p>
<pb n="103"/><anchor id="Pg103"/>

<p>We were recommended to sail down the Morlaix
River to its mouth, as the scenery is very picturesque,
but we had not time to effect it. The
great beauty of Brittany generally consists in its
river scenery, the Rance, to Dinan; the rivers of
Quimper and Quimperlé; the Aven, Elorn, and
Blavet, are all highly picturesque and worth visiting.
Our next drive was to St. Pol de Léon, partly along
the bank of the river, passing under the church of
Notre Dame-de-la-Salzette and the convent below
of St. François. The tall steeples of St. Pol are
seen at a great distance, and looking behind is the
best view of the Mené-Bré, an insulated conical
mountain, one of the Mené-Arré chain, situated
near the station of Belle-Isle-Bégard. A chain of
mountains runs through the Côtes-du-Nord, and, at
the western end of the department, forks off into
two branches which traverse the whole of Finistère,&mdash;the
Mené-Arré, or northern chain, and the Montagnes
Noires, or southern.</p>

<p>St. Pol looks like a town of the Middle Ages.
"The holy city," as it is called by the Léonnais,
one of the four bishoprics<note place="foot">St. Pol de Léon,
Cornouaille, Vannes et Tréguier.</note> into which Brittany was
divided, comprising the modern districts of Morlaix
and Brest. The Pays de Léon is remarkable for
<pb n="104"/><anchor id="Pg104"/>
the number of its religious monuments, its fine
churches, its bone-houses, calvaries, way-side crosses,
and shrines. Crosses are set up in every direction,
and of every description, from the plain unpretending
simple cross of wood or stone, to the huge
crosses flaunting in green paint, with tears of gold&mdash;specimens
of the taste of the maire or priest of
the district. No Breton passes the sacred symbol
without kneeling to salute it, and making the sign
of the cross&mdash;evidence that the piety of those who
first raised them has not degenerated in their
posterity. The country is rich and varied. The
Léonnais is tallest of all the Breton race; his dress is
generally black or blue, with a coloured scarf round
his waist, his hair is worn very long, and his broad-brimmed
hat has a silver buckle.  He is grave,
of a calm confiding faith, which nothing can shake
or alter, and of intense religious feeling.  The
church is the place of meeting, where all his business
is transacted, all his aspirations centered.
Throughout Brittany the priesthood are low and
ignorant. Like the Irish, the Breton farmer's
great ambition is to make his son a priest. In no
part of France are they more uneducated than in
Brittany.</p>

<p>St. Pol is still and melancholy, the grass grows
in the streets, the city looks as if it had not
awakened since its palmy days of the fourteenth
<pb n="105"/><anchor id="Pg105"/>
century. Its churches, <corr sic="calvarys">calvaries</corr>, cemeteries, all
silent as death&mdash;</p>

<p rend="small; text-align:center"><q>A deep,
still pool in the ocean of life.</q></p>

<p>Its lively neighbour, Morlaix, offers a strange contrast:
its inhabitants may well say they are three
hundred years in advance of St. Pol.</p>

<p>The pride of St. Pol de Léon is the church of
Notre Dame-de-Creizker. Its steeple, nearly 400 feet
high, was said by Vauban to be the boldest piece of
architecture he ever beheld. It is built in the centre
of the church, entirely of granite, cut in the shape of
tiles and open work, to within eighty feet from the
base. According to the legend, on the spot where
the church now stands, there lived in the time of
St. Génévroc, a young girl, whom the saint found,
when passing her house on the fête of our Lady,
employed at her needle. He reproached her gently
with her impiety, yet she went on sewing, saying
"she required food on Sundays as well as on work
days." But the girl has hardly finished speaking,
when all her body became cold and motionless as
a stone. She was completely paralysed. Asking
pardon of St. Génévroc, he made the sign of the
cross upon each of her limbs, and the power of
motion returned. Grateful for her recovery, she
gave to the saint, her house, which was situated in
the middle of the town (as its name implies), as a
<pb n="106"/><anchor id="Pg106"/>
site for his church. It is said to have been built by
an English architect, invited to Brittany by Mary
Plantagenet, daughter of Edward III., and first wife
of Duke John IV.<note place="foot">
His second wife was also English, Jane Holland, half-sister
of Richard II.; his third, Joan, daughter of Charles the Bad,
King of Navarre, who afterwards married Henry IV. of
England.</note></p>

<p>The axis of the nave is inclined to the left, a
mystic allusion to the position of the head of the
expiring Saviour on the cross. <hi rend="italic">Et inclinato capite,
emise spiritum</hi>, "And He bowed his head, and gave
up the ghost." The north porch of the Creizker is
beautifully sculptured with leaves of the mallow, the
vine, and mulberry. It was all under repair when
we saw it.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 22. The Creizker.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image22.jpg">
    <head>22. The <corr sic="Creisker">Creizker</corr>.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>The cathedral has two fine towers with spires, and
a magnificent rose window of the fifteenth century
in the south transept, with, above, the "fenêtre
d'excommunication." The fine porch, lightly and
delicately sculptured, is surmounted by a balustrade,
whence the episcopal benediction was given. Over
the high altar is a large wooden crosier, gilt, from
which to suspend the ciborium, similar to that we
saw in the cathedral of Dol. A black marble slab,
at the foot of the steps of the high altar, marks the
grave of St. Pol de Léon, who died 570. St. Pol,
the patron bishop and founder of the cathedral, was
<pb n="107"/><anchor id="Pg107"/>
<pb n="108"/><anchor id="Pg108"/>
<pb n="109"/><anchor id="Pg109"/>
one of the clergy of Great Britain who emigrated
to Brittany in the sixth century; he landed in the
island of Ouëssant, and passed on to the country of
Léon, where he founded a monastery. The island
of Batz was, at that time, infested by an enormous
dragon, sixty feet long; the saint, accompanied by
a warrior, entered the cavern of the monster, tied
his stole round its neck, and gave him to his companion
to lead, St. Pol following, beating him with
his stick, till they arrived at the extremity of the
island, when he took off the stole, and commanded
the dragon to throw itself in the sea, an order the
animal immediately obeyed. St. Pol is always represented
with the dragon by his side, the stole round
its neck. We were shown a little bell, said to have
belonged to the saint. It appears he had repeatedly
asked the king to give him this bell for his new
church, but had always been refused. When one
day some fishermen brought him a large fish taken
off the island of Batz, and in its mouth was the
coveted bell. It is certainly very ancient in form,
a kind of square pyramid about four inches wide
and nine high, of beaten red copper mixed, we were
told, with a considerable quantity of silver. It is
now rung over the heads of the faithful on pardons,
as a specific against headache and earache&mdash;a singular
remedy! The cathedral has a fine marble tomb
of Bishop Visdelou, preacher to Queen Anne of
<pb n="110"/><anchor id="Pg110"/>
Austria; he is represented in a half reclining posture,
in his pontifical garments. In every part of the
cathedral are the little boxes of skulls.</p>

<p>Adjacent is the Ursuline convent, where is preserved
a small figure of the Virgin in jet; brought
from a church in the Iles Sainte Marguerite, taken
from the Spaniards in the seventeenth century. It
is supposed to possess miraculous powers, and is
sent round to the sick as a specific.</p>

<p>We breakfasted at the little inn (Hôtel de
France), commanding a pretty view of the coast
from its windows and garden. The Léon country
was governed by Viscounts, who boasted, among
several manorial rights, the "droit de motte," which
empowered them, if a vassal (they were "serfs de
motte") attempted to live out of his demesne, or to
enter the service of another lord, to bring him back
to his "motte," a cord round his neck, and inflict
upon him corporal punishment. By virtue of the
same right, if the demesne of a lord was so placed
that it had no natural height from which to survey
its extent, his vassals were made to bring sufficient
cart-loads of earth to raise a mound or "motte" of
the requisite elevation. The other privilege was the
droit de "bris," equivalent to our flotsum and jetsum,
so lucrative that a Léon Viscount is recorded to have
said, when a noble was exhibiting his casket of gems,
that he possessed a jewel more precious than all
<pb n="111"/><anchor id="Pg111"/>
they were admiring&mdash;alluding to a rock famous for
its shipwrecks. Duke John the Red, taking advantage
of the misdeeds of one of these lords of Léon,
seized his rich possessions and united them (1276) to
the crown. The viscounty of Léon fell by alliance,
in the fourteenth century, to the house of Rohan,
in whose favour is was raised in the sixteenth to a
principality.</p>

<p>We continued our drive to Roscoff, three miles
distant, a little sea-port town, formerly one of the
three great dens of corsairs and smugglers, all under
the protection of St. Barbe,&mdash;the other two being
Camaret and Le Conquet. Roscoff was the emporium
of considerable contraband trade with England. Tea,
wine, and brandy were brought over in small casks,
which the smugglers tied together and threw into
the sea, when near the coast, and landed at night.
The whole country round is now one extent of
kitchen-garden, the light sandy soil, dressed with
the goëmon, produces an incredible quantity of
vegetables, onions, cabbages, parsnips, asparagus, artichokes,
cauliflowers, &amp;c. Of onions, 2,000,000 lbs.
are said to be sent every year to England alone.
The people here wear black caps, those of the men
are stocking-knit. The gardeners of Roscoff will
carry their produce above a hundred miles for sale.
The chief vegetable consumed by the Bretons
themselves is the cabbage, of which the quantity
<pb n="112"/><anchor id="Pg112"/>
raised is enormous. The kind grown is mostly the
Jersey or cow-cabbage, which grows with stalks
from five to six feet high, and has large leaves at
every joint. They use them for their cattle, as
well as for their own eating. Avenues of cabbages,
stacked five or six feet high, are to be seen in most
Breton markets. Bread or porridge of buckwheat
(blé noir) with cabbage-soup is the customary diet
of the country. The recipe is simple, consisting of a
cabbage-leaf, over which a little hot water is thrown,
and a "soupçon" of butter added to give it a
flavour. These ingredients compose the national
soup which always appears at the tâble d'hôte, with
the inevitable "ragoût," <hi rend="italic">i. e.</hi> harricoed mutton.

The little town of Roscoff has some historic
importance. It was here that John de Montfort
sailed to England to do homage to King Edward III.
for the duchy of Brittany, and returned by the same
port. Here also the child-princess Mary Stuart
landed in 1548 to marry the young Dauphin, afterwards
Francis II. In commemoration of the event,
she afterwards caused the little chapel of St. Ninian
to be built close on the water's edge. It is not more
than fifty feet long, and has an eastern flamboyant
window, with others in the side walls. The
arches are fast going to decay, the stone altar is
also sculptured. When we saw it, the interior was
filled with bundles of broom-branches and poultry.
<pb n="113"/><anchor id="Pg113"/>
It is strange this little chapel, built by the Queen of
two Kingdoms, should be suffered to fall to ruin for
the lack of a trifling outlay.</p>

<p>Here, two hundred years later, Prince Charles
Stuart landed after Culloden, in the French frigate
the 'Heureux,' sent by the French Government
to facilitate his escape, having eluded, through the
chances of a fog, the pursuit of the English cruisers;
and here he knelt, in the chapel of his ancestress, to
return thanks for his deliverance.</p>

<p>The church of Roscoff has a curious pierced
steeple, like many of those in Finistère, and some
alabaster bas-reliefs of the fourteenth century, with
numerous boxes of skulls. A ship rudely sculptured
by the porch, and another by the east window, show
that the fishermen and ship-owners contributed to
the building of the church. By the shore is a rock
of grotesque form, and opposite, about three miles
from Roscoff, is the pretty island of Batz, which
derives its name&mdash;Breton "batz," a stick&mdash;from the
rod used by St. Pol de Léon to work his miracle.</p>

<p>People were busily employed in boats collecting
the goëmon, which they pile in heaps along the
shore. The great curiosity of Roscoff is its enormous
fig-tree, in the garden of the Capucine convent,
said to be two centuries old. It is supported by
stone pillars, and is, we were informed, above 300 feet
in circumference.</p>
<pb n="114"/><anchor id="Pg114"/>

<p>We returned that evening to Morlaix: the viaduct
by moonlight had a most picturesque appearance.
Next morning we proceeded by rail to the station
of St. Thégonnec, where nothing in the shape of a
vehicle was to be had to convey us to the town&mdash;nearly
a mile and a half distant&mdash;but the ricketty
two-wheeled mail cart. At the little cabaret, which
bears the important name of Hôtel de la Grande
Maison, we procured breakfast. The church has
been restored. It is rich in carvings, spoiled by
gilding, the altars and canopied pulpit especially.
Opposite to the last are two coloured "retables."
The high altar, with two side altars and two smaller
ones behind, are gorgeously carved, coloured and
gilt, and extend to the roof. The painted-glass
windows are the gifts of various persons. At the
entrance of the churchyard is a Renaissance porch,
or triumphal arch, dated 1581, with a sculpture
representing St. Thégonnec, a bullock and car by
his side. Adjoining, is the ossuary, or reliquary,
bearing the date 1676, also in the same elaborate
style, destitute of bones, but having below a crypt
containing a group of life-sized figures representing
the Entombment, with this inscription:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Tu le vois mort, pécheur, ce Dieu qui t'a fait naître:</q></l>
<l>Sa mort est ton ouvrage, et devient ton appui.</l>
<l><q rend="post">A ce trait de bonté, tu dois au moins vivre pour lui.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>In the churchyard is also a calvary; the name given
<pb n="115"/><anchor id="Pg115"/>
to those monumental sculptures peculiar to Brittany,
consisting of the crucifix, surrounded by the chief
witnesses of the crucifixion, together with minor
groups representing passages in the life of our
Saviour. This calvary, executed in Kersanton
stone, is dated 1610; the numerous figures are all
in the grotesque costume of the period, with ruffs,
toquets, trained gowns, and scalloped jackets.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 23. Calvary, Guimiliau.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image23.jpg">
    <head>23. Calvary, Guimiliau.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>We took a carriage for Guimiliau, passing on our
road to the left, a grotto. The church of Guimiliau
partly dates from the Renaissance; it has a finely
sculptured porch, and contains within carvings of
great beauty; the pulpit, supported on a column, is
dated 1677; the organ-loft is enriched with splendid
bas-reliefs in oak panels,&mdash;one represents a triumphal
march, after Le Brun, the others, King David and
St. Cecilia. But the grand monumental carving is
the magnificent baptistery or baptismal font, surmounted
by a baldachin or canopy, supported by
eight twisted columns interlaced with vines, grapes
and flowers, with graceful little birds pecking the
fruit. On the top of the canopy is a dolphin, and
above, two figures of Fame, trumpet-mouthed, surmounted
by a royal crown and the letters S. V. This
baptistery and the organ-loft are both in the style
of Louis XIV., and are said to have cost 30,000 francs.
In the churchyard are a triumphal arch and a reliquary,
both inferior to those of St. Thégonnec, but
<pb n="116"/><anchor id="Pg116"/>
the calvary of Guimiliau is one of the most extensive
in Brittany. It is of the sixteenth century.
It consists of a solid platform, ascended by a staircase,
and raised upon arches; upon it, sculptured in
Kersanton stone, are the three crosses, the centre
one beautifully carved with St. John and the Virgin
<pb n="117"/><anchor id="Pg117"/>
Mary by the side. The four Evangelists are placed
at each corner, and all the passages in the life of
Christ are represented by groups of little figures in
the costume of the sixteenth century. This singular
monument bears two different dates, those of 1581
and 1588.</p>

<p>Guimiliau is close to the railway, but there is no
station there. We returned to St. Thégonnec. The
peasants along the road were threshing their buckwheat
on the open ground; women as well as men
were at work. They threshed in a circle, keeping
good time with their strokes, and laughing merrily
while they flourished their flails,&mdash;they appeared a
most joyous party,&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Ho! batteux, battons la gerbe,</q></l>
<l><q rend="post">Compagnons, joyeusement.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>Buckwheat, their "blé noir," is the Breton's chief
food, and is cultivated to a large extent. With its
coral-red stalks and snowy flowers it has a very
pretty appearance growing, and is the first care of
the Breton farmer&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Ah! que la sombre nue aux funestes lueurs,</q></l>
<l rend="margin-left:2">Planant sur la campagne,</l>
<l>Epargne les blés-noirs, les blés aux blanches fleurs,</l>
<l rend="margin-left:2"><q rend="post">Ce pain de la Bretagne."</q>
&mdash;<bibl><author rend="smallcaps">Stéphane Halgan</author></bibl>.</l>
</lg>

<p>This plant, a native of Asia Minor, was evidently,
from its French name, "sarrazin," introduced into
Europe by the Saracens or Moors. We proceeded
<pb n="118"/><anchor id="Pg118"/>
by rail to Brest, passing under the foot of the abrupt
rock upon which stand the picturesque ruins of the
ancient castle of La Roche Maurice and the church
of La Roche. The rail runs along the banks of the
Elorn through a narrow wooded valley; the windings
of the river are very picturesque, and formerly a
steamer ran from Landerneau to Brest, affording the
opportunity of seeing them.</p>

<p>Brest, the first harbour in France, is Breton only
in name and locality; it is built in an amphitheatre
on the slopes of two hills divided by the river Penfeld,
which forms the port. On the right is the
suburb Recouvrance, on the left Brest proper. This
irregular site often causes the second floor of the
houses in one street to be on a line with the ground
floor of another. Brest is clean and well built, and
consists of three long parallel streets. The principal
one, called the Rue de Siam, in commemoration of
the Siamese Ambassadors sent to Louis XIV., who
landed here, runs the whole length of the town,
ending at the fine iron bridge called the Pont
Impériale, the largest swing-bridge ever constructed.
You descend by a flight of steps from
the Rue de Siam to the lower streets. Running
along the bay, of considerable extent, and well
planted with trees, is the magnificent promenade
called the Cours d'Ajot, from the name of the
officer of the Engineers by whom it was laid out
<pb n="119"/><anchor id="Pg119"/>
and planted a century back. Well sheltered by its
trees and refreshed by the sea breezes, it commands
a fine view over the new "port de commerce," and
the whole extent of the harbour of Brest, which is
capable of containing 500 ships of the line, and
is, with the exception of those of Rio Janeiro
and Constantinople, the largest and most beautiful
in the world.</p>

<p>Brest harbour has only one entrance, which is
to the west, through a narrow channel called Le
Goulet, less than a mile in width, and cut into two
by the Mingant rock. In the year 1796 the 'Republican'
was lost here. Sailing out of the harbour,
with a contrary wind and snow, the pilot thought
he had passed the Mingant rock, when the ship
struck, and went down with 800 men on board.
Brest Castle in the Middle Ages was a place of such
strength and importance that John IV., who had
four times besieged it fruitlessly, when it was under
the English dominion, was wont to say "Ce n'est
duc de Bretagne, qui n'est pas sire de Brest." It
had been held by Sir Robert Knolles against the
army of the King of France under Du Guesclin,
who was obliged to raise the siege. The donjon
was built by King Richard II. during the War of
Succession. The making Brest an important naval
station was the thought of Richelieu, and the work
of Louis XIV., who built the arsenal.</p>
<pb n="120"/><anchor id="Pg120"/>

<p>Next day we made an excursion to see the church
of Notre Dame-du-Folgoët or the Fool of the Wood,
celebrated in legendary lore: the tale is so old and
often told, we have some scruples in repeating it.</p>

<p>Towards the middle of the fourteenth century,
there lived in the woods of Lesneven, a poor idiot
boy, called Salaun (Solomon), better known under
the name of the Fool of the Wood (Folgoët). He
was miserably clad, had no bed but the ground; no
pillow, but a stone; no roof, but the tree which
gave him shelter. He went every day to Lesneven
to seek his daily bread, but he never begged; he
uttered the simple words "Ave Maria! Solomon
could eat bread," and returned with whatever pittance
was given him to his tree near the fountain, into
which he dipped his crusts, and plunged even in
the depth of winter, for his bath, always repeating
the words, "Hail, Maria!"  One day a party of
marauding soldiers accosted him. In answer to their
questions, he replied, "I am neither for Blois nor
Montfort, I am the servant of the Lady Mary."
This simple life he led for nearly forty years, when
at last he fell ill and died, repeating his favourite
words "Ave Maria." He was found dead near the
fountain, and was buried by his neighbours. After
a time, when the memory of the poor idiot boy had
nearly passed away, there suddenly sprung up from
his grave a white lily with the words "Ave Maria"
<pb n="121"/><anchor id="Pg121"/>
inscribed in letters of gold upon its petals. The
news of the miracle spread throughout all Brittany,
Duke John sent commissioners; the grave was
opened, and it was found the lily proceeded from
the mouth of Salaun,&mdash;"ceste royale fleur sortait
par sa bouche du creux de son estomach"&mdash;a testimony
of the innocence and piety "du plus beau
mignon de la reine des Cieux." Duke John vowed
to erect a church to our Lady over the fountain of
the poor mendicant, whose faith had been thus recognised;<note place="foot">
"Venu au monde à l'époque où naissait Bertrand Du
Guesclin, enlevé au ciel à l'époque du combat des Trente,
Salaun fit moins de bruit sur la terre que le célébre Connétable
ou que les braves compagnons de Beaumanoir. Son corps
ne fut pas transporté en pompe royale à S. Denis, pour y
reposer au milieu des souverains; aucun obélisque ne rappelle
sa mémoire: mais sur son humble tombe on a construit un
monument qui fire vivre son nom dans la suite des siècles. C'est
que Salaun, loin de chercher l'agitation des combats, ne demande
que le calme de la prière. Il choisit la meilleure part, et il ne
fut pas otée."&mdash;<bibl><author rend="smallcaps">Pol de Courcy.</author></bibl></note>
and, faithful to his promise, the first
stone was laid by him in 1366, as a thank-offering
for his success the previous year at the battle of
Auray, which had fixed the crown upon his head.
His wife, Joan of Navarre, not only made a pilgrimage
to the Folgoët in 1396, but also contributed
to the building of the church. It was
completed by John V., about 1419. The Queen-Duchess
Anne of Brittany went there in pilgrimage
<pb n="122"/><anchor id="Pg122"/>
after the recovery from illness of Louis XIII. Anne
of Austria founded six masses at the Folgoët, in
gratitude for the birth of Louis XIV., and several
popes granted indulgences to those who made
pilgrimages to this shrine. This church is one of
the finest in Brittany. Its colour is sombre; it
is the oldest monument in Brittany in which the
Kersanton stone is employed.  This stone is a
volcanic rock called hornblende, of very fine grain,
with minute specks of mica. There is a large quarry
near St. Pol de Léon; but it is found principally on
the west of the harbour of Brest, near a village from
which it takes its name. Kersanton stone is of a
dark-green colour, approaching to bronze, gives
out a metallic sound when struck, and is easily
worked in the quarry, in blocks of from twenty to
forty feet cube, but hardens on exposure to the air.
Time has no destructive effect on it; the most
delicate, lightest, and most ornamental sculptures
executed in it remain uninjured, while the hardest
granites, erected at the same time, are friable and
decomposed. The Kersanton stone cuts glass like
a diamond.</p>

<p>The architecture of the Folgoët is distinguished
for the elegance and richness of its ornamentation:
the softness of the Kersanton stone, when fresh
taken from the quarry fits it specially for the deeply
cut, lace-like works of the artists of the flamboyant
<pb n="123"/><anchor id="Pg123"/>
school, and the church is remarkable for the skill
with which the productions of the vegetable kingdom
are represented both within and without. It has no
transepts, but to the south is a projection formed
by the treasure chamber. The modern pulpit has a
series of medallion bas-reliefs representing the legend
of Solomon.</p>

<p>The jubé, or roodloft, is a perfect lacework of
stone. Above three arches, decorated with vine-leaves,
is an open-worked gallery of pierced quatre-foils
surpassing in exuberance of ornament any other
known.</p>

<p>To the east are five altars, all of Kersanton stone,
most delicately sculptured&mdash;the under-cutting of
the foliage most wonderful. They are in the shape
of tombs or sarcophagi, the form generally adopted
for altars in the sixteenth century. Round the
"autel des anges," richest of them all, is a row of
eighteen niches, filled in with the figures of angels,
holding alternately phylacteries and escutcheons;
round the top is a cornice of thistle-leaves&mdash;on the
cut stalk of one hangs a dew-drop perfect to nature.</p>

<p>The high altar is decorated with vine-leaves, birds
pecking the grapes, and the ermine, with its motto
"À ma vie," introduced. The altar of the rosary
has also a cornice of vine-leaves modelled evidently
after the high altar.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 24. The Fool's Well, Folgoët.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image24.jpg">
    <head>24. The Fool's Well, Folgoët.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>The fine flamboyant rose window at the east of
<pb n="124"/><anchor id="Pg124"/>
the church resembles that of St. Pol de Léon, and
below it is the fountain of Salaun. The spring is
concealed under the high altar, and flows into a
basin without, preserved by a kind of Gothic porch
sculptured with thistle-leaves and crockets, and
within it, on a bracket, is a delicately chiseled image
of the Virgin. Some children round the fountain
<pb n="125"/><anchor id="Pg125"/>
offered us pins, the use of which we did not understand.
We afterwards learned that it is the custom
in Brittany for girls to take a pin from their bodice,
and throw it into a sacred well, to ascertain, by its
manner of sinking, when they would be married.
If the pin falls head foremost, then there is no
present hope of matrimony, but if the point goes
first, it is a sure sign of being married that year.</p>

<p>On the new year, in some parts of Brittany, pieces
of bread-and-butter are thrown into the fountains,
and from the way in which they swim the future is
foretold. If the buttered side turns under, it forebodes
death; if two pieces adhere together, it is a
sign of sickness; and if the piece floats, it is an
assurance of long life and happiness.</p>

<p>The veneration for springs and healing wells is
of very ancient date, and was prohibited by early
councils of the Church; but the worship of that
element from which suffering humanity seeks for
relief in all its ailments has passed through succeeding
creeds, and that which was held sacred a thousand
years back is still the object of reverence and
affection.</p>

<p>Nor is the sculpture outside the church less remarkable
than the interior. The west door, now
fallen to decay, has an arch with double entrance
separated by a column containing a bénitier. A
wreath of curled leaves runs round the arch, and on
<pb n="126"/><anchor id="Pg126"/>
a bracket of thistle-leaves formerly stood a statue of
John V.</p>

<p>The north side has little ornament. The great
richness is in the south, where is the fine porch of
Bishop Alain de la Rue, who consecrated the building,
and more splendid still, is, at the angle formed
by the projecting sacristy facing the west, the Porch
of the Apostles. The twelve Apostles are ranged on
each side, under rich canopies; the whole porch one
mass of floral decoration, vine-leaves and mallows,
interspersed with dragons, birds, and insects. On
the right of the porch is a crouching figure with a
label inscribed: "Bn soiez venz,"&mdash;"Bien soiez
venuz" or "Soyez les bien venus"&mdash;an invitation
to the faithful to enter into the church. On the
lintel of the two doors are ermines passant, and the
motto of the Dukes of Brittany, "À ma vie," and
towards the south are the remains of a whole cornice
of ermines, running through the rings of a long scroll
inscribed with "À ma vie." This motto was first
taken by Duke John IV. (who instituted the order
of the Ermine) to imply that he had conquered
Brittany, and would maintain it, even at the cost of
his life, "à ma vie."<note place="foot">
Duke Francis I. subsequently united the order of the
Ermine with that of the "Epi;" and the collar was then composed
of ears of corn, with an ermine pendant, and the motto
of Duke John.</note></p>
<pb n="127"/><anchor id="Pg127"/>

<p>The collar consisted of a double chain, in each of
which were four ermines, and two more hung suspended
from two chains, surmounted by coronets.
The motto "À ma vie" was placed round each of
these ten ermines. The Père Lobineau quotes a
history of Duke John, in which the order is thus
spoken of:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Lors fit mander tous les Prélats,</q></l>
<l>Abbés et Clercs de tous Estats,</l>
<l>Barons, Chevaliers, Escuyers,</l>
<l>Qui tous portoient nouveaux Colliers</l>
<l>De moult bel port et belle guise;</l>
<l>Et étoit nouvelle Dévise</l>
<l>De deux Rolets brunis et beaux,</l>
<l>Couplés ensemble de deux fermeaux;</l>
<l>Et au dessus étoit l'Ermine</l>
<l>En figure et en couleur fine,</l>
<l>En deux Cedules avoit escript</l>
<l><hi rend="italic">À ma vie</hi>, comme j'ai dit;</l>
<l>L'un mot est blanc, l'autre noir,</l>
<l><q rend="post">Il est certain, tien, pour le voir.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>In the churchyard is a cross erected by Cardinal
de Coëtivy (died 1474), who is represented kneeling
at the foot; it is said to be the work of Michel
Colomb, sculptor of the celebrated monument raised
by Queen Anne of Brittany to her parents, now
in the Cathedral at Nantes. Next day, we went
to Le Conquet, returning by St. Mathieu. We
crossed the swing-bridge to the suburb Recouvrance,
so called from the chapel of our Lady, to whom
<pb n="128"/><anchor id="Pg128"/>
shipwrecked mariners addressed their petitions to
recover (recouvrir) their property. On our left we
saw the islet rock of Bertheaume, about 200 feet
high, distant from the coast 150. Until lately, the
communication with the mainland was by means of
a kind of cradle drawn on two cables, about nine
mètres in circumference.</p>

<p>Le Conquet<note place="foot">
The word <hi rend="italic">cong</hi>, in ancient Breton, means a basin surrounded
by quays, to receive and protect vessels from wind and
sea&mdash;as Conquet, Concarneau, or Cong-kernay.</note>
is a little seaport built on the slope
of a steep hill. Formerly it was of some importance,
and a great resort of pirates. Sir Walter Manny
took the town for the Countess of Montfort, during
the war of the two Jeannes, and it was attacked by
the fleets of Henry VIII. and his daughter Mary.
Opposite is a beautiful beach, called the Blancs
Sablons, accessible at low water by walking across
the harbour. Here is the point of communication
with the island of Ouëssant, about seventeen miles
distant, by means of a steamer, weather permitting,
as the Chenal du Four, which separates this group
of islands from the continent, is covered with rocks
and is very dangerous in rough weather. Its men
are all seamen or fishermen, the women perform the
agricultural labour. They bring in their produce
to Brest at the monthly fairs, and are not so cut off
from the world as Gresset describes them:&mdash;</p>

<pb n="129"/><anchor id="Pg129"/>
<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Sous un ciel toujours rigoureux</q></l>
<l>Au sein des flots impétueux,</l>
<l>Non loin de l'Armorique plage</l>
<l>Habitacle marécageux,</l>
<l>Moitié peuplé, moitié sauvage,</l>
<l>Dont les habitants malheureux</l>
<l>Separés du reste du monde,</l>
<l>Semblent ne connoître l'onde</l>
<l><q rend="post">Et n'être connus que des cieux.</q></l>
<l rend="right"><bibl><author rend="smallcaps">Gresset.</author>&mdash;<title rend="italic">Carême impromptu.</title></bibl></l>
</lg>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 25. Abbey of St. Mathieu.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image25.jpg">
    <head>25. Abbey of St. Mathieu.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>We now reached the Abbey of St. Mathieu,
situated on the extreme point of Brittany and of
France, on the top of a promontory, well called
Finistère. Here in the sixth century was built a
monastery in honour of St. Matthew the Evangelist,
whose head had been stolen in Egypt by some
Breton navigators, and been brought to land at this
point, which long bore the name of "St. Mathieu
de fin de terre" (Finistère). In the twelfth century
the monastery was converted into a Benedictine
abbey, which is a beautiful example of the Early
English style. The formidable rocks at its feet are
called Les Moines. The monks of St. Mathieu
kept a beacon for the safety of mariners on these
dangerous shores. The modern lighthouse quite
masks the sight of the abbey, and is a great disfigurement
to the view, which, in other respects, is most
grand; the imposing granite ruins of the abbey
church on the very edge of these weather-beaten
cliffs, worn and torn by the ocean with its unwearied
<pb n="130"/><anchor id="Pg130"/>
waves; on the right, the reefs of the Passage du
Four, which appear to unite the islands of Ouëssant
and its satellites to St. Mathieu; on the left the
elongated point of the Bec du Raz, which no one,
according to the Bretons, ever passed without grief
and suffering. In sight of Saint Mathieu, the
English in 1504, with eighty ships, attacked Hervé
de Porzmoguer, a Breton captain, with only twenty.
His own ship the 'Cordelière,' which had been built
and fitted out by Anne of Bretagne, at her own
expense, took fire; it held 1200 troops besides the
ship's company. Porzmoguer grappled the 'Cordelière'
to the ship of the English admiral, the 'Great
Harry;' and both vessels, driven by the north-west
wind to the entrance of the Goulet, were burned
together, and above 2000 men perished in the two
ships. Porzmoguer mounted the mast followed by
the raging flames, and cast himself from the main-top,
in full armour, into the sea.</p>

<p>In 1597, the fleet sent by Philip II. to take possession
of Brittany for Spain was dispersed in a storm
off Point St. Mathieu, and, out of a hundred and
twenty ships, scarcely one remained.</p>

<p>On our way home, we passed a little town called
La Trinité, from three springs all issuing from the
same fountain, at which washerwomen with their
wooden bats were hard at work, beating the clothes
to rags on the stones.</p>
<pb n="131"/><anchor id="Pg131"/>

<pb n="132"/><anchor id="Pg132"/>

<pb n="133"/><anchor id="Pg133"/>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 26. Peasant Girl of Ouëssant.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image26.jpg">
    <head>26. Peasant Girl of Ouëssant.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>Next day was the monthly fair at Brest, which
brought in many of the country people in their
picturesque costumes. Most conspicuous among
them were the peasants of Ouëssant, last type of the
Celtic women, in their singularly Italian-looking
head-dress, their hair streaming over their shoulders;
and the Plougastel men, in red caps, with coats and
trowsers of white flannel.</p>

<p>Most of the market-women were furnished with
<pb n="134"/><anchor id="Pg134"/>
enormous umbrellas, red, blue, and green. In this
rainy province, they are indispensable, and the acquisition
of an umbrella is a great object of ambition
to the Breton peasant.</p>

<p>We left Brest by the steamer for Pont Launay
and Châteaulin, a four hours' sail in the harbour of
Brest. On the right we passed the Point des Espagnols,
where Frobisher, sent by Queen Elizabeth to
the assistance of Henry IV., received his death wound.
Leaving on our left Plougastel, where we were unable
to visit the celebrated calvary, we passed near the
"Anse du Fret," whence Joan of Navarre, then
widow of Duke John IV., sailed to England to
marry Henry of Lancaster, 1403. Henry, when
Earl of Derby, had visited Nantes to ask the assistance
of his uncle in returning to England, and Joan
had favoured his expedition, but Duke John died
the same year (1399). When Queen Dowager of
England, she saw the children of her two husbands
arrayed against each other, and her son Arthur, who
had been invested by King Henry IV. with the
Earldom of Richmond, made prisoner at Agincourt
by his half-brother King Henry V., who confined
him in the Tower, and afterwards in Fotheringay
Castle. Joan received hard treatment from her
stepson. Accused of being a sorceress&mdash;a reputation
she inherited from her father, Charles the Bad of
Navarre&mdash;Henry caused her to be confined in
<pb n="135"/><anchor id="Pg135"/>
Leeds and Pevensey castles, and deprived her of
her property. It was only on his approaching
death that he restored her to liberty. She retired
to Havering Bower in Essex, where her grandson,
the unfortunate Gilles de Bretagne, was reared
and educated with Henry VI. She died in 1437,
and the memory of "Joan the witch queen" was
long held in awe by the people of Havering Bower.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 27. Peasant Girl, Châteaulin.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image27.jpg">
    <head>27. Peasant Girl, Châteaulin.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>On the left is the hamlet of Kersanton, which
gives its name to the stone so called. At the entrance
of the Aulne,<note place="foot">
A fine viaduct is in course of construction across the
valley of the Aulne, composed of twelve arches, remarkable for
their immense span (72 feet), and at an elevation of 170 feet
above the water.</note> to the right, we passed the ruins of the
abbey of Landévenec, the most ancient monastic
establishment in Brittany. At Pont Launay an omnibus
took us to the railway station at Châteaulin,
celebrated for its slate quarries, a drive of three
quarters of an hour. From here we proceeded by
rail to Quimper, capital of Cornouaille. The district
of Cornouaille&mdash;Cornu-Galliæ, expressing its position
at the horn or extremity of France&mdash;is most varied in
character. The part on the north is enclosed between
the two chains of mountains, which, running nearly
parallel with each other, traverse the department
of Finistère, the Mené-Arré, and the Montagnes
Noires. A single chain passes through the Côtes-du-Nord,
<pb n="136"/><anchor id="Pg136"/>
and forks off, at the edge of the department,
near Callac, whence the northern range, the
Mené-Arré, runs westwards to Faou harbour; while
the Montagnes Noires incline to the south-west, and
reach the sea near Crozon. The country between
these chains is dreary and bare&mdash;barren plains and
black mountains; to the south it is cultivated and
productive. The stormy rock-bound coast is wild
and desolate. One-third of the department consists
<pb n="137"/><anchor id="Pg137"/>
of landes, marshes, and sandy shores (<hi rend="italic">grèves</hi>).
The people are the Irish of Brittany. Their wants
are restricted to a tub of salted pork and a provision
of cider, with rye, or black corn, to make their
"galette." They are simple in their manners, kind
to the poor, and enduring of suffering. Respect
for the misfortunes of others, and patience under
their own, is one of the Breton characteristics.</p>

<p>In the days of Conan Meriadec there lived a holy
man, called Corentin, who retired to a solitude for
prayer and meditation, near a fountain in a forest.
Every morning a little fish came to him from the
fountain; he cut a piece off it for his daily pittance
and threw it again into the water, and in an instant
the fish became whole. The miracle was repeated
every morning. One day King Gradlon, who held
his court at "Kemper," was in the forest near the
hermitage of St. Corentin, with some of his suite, and
asked him if he could give him something to eat.
The saint immediately ran to his fountain and called
his little fish, cut off a piece, which he gave to the
maître d'hôtel to prepare for the king and his attendants.
The chef laughed when he took the slice;
but, to the surprise of everybody, the fish multiplied
so as to completely satisfy the hunger of the king
and his party. Gradlon threw himself on his knees
at the feet of St. Corentin, and gave him the forest,
with a "maison de plaisance," which St. Corentin
<pb n="138"/><anchor id="Pg138"/>
converted into a monastery. The king afterwards
erected Quimper into a bishopric, to which he nominated
St. Corentin:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l rend="left-margin:4"><q rend="pre">Voici dans le fond la ville de Kemper,</q></l>
<l>Asise au confluent de l'Oded et du Ster.</l>
<l>Comme sa cathédrale, aux deux tours dentelées,</l>
<l>S'élève noblement du milieu des vallées,</l>
<l>O perle de l'Oded, fille du roi Grallon,</l>
<l>Qui de saint Corentin portes aussi le nom,</l>
<l>Rejouis-toi, Kemper, dans tes vielles murailles!</l>
<l>Vois avec quelle ardeur, ô reine de Cornouailles,</l>
<l>Tes fils de tous les points de l'antique évêché,</l>
<l>Pêcheurs et montagnards, viennent à ton marché!</l>
<l>Cornouillais! en passant près de sa basilique,</l>
<l>Du bon saint Corentin adorez la relique.</l>
<l>Que tous ceux d'Elliant et des mêmes chemins</l>
<l>Boivent à sa fontaine et s'y lavent les mains;</l>
<l>Non pas les Léonards, eux de qui les ancêtres,</l>
<l>Voici quelque mille ans, hommes jaloux et traîtres,</l>
<l>Volèrent le poisson dont notre Corentin</l>
<l>Coupait pour se nourrir un pen chaque matin,</l>
<l>Et qui chaque matin, ô pieuse merveille!</l>
<l>Nageait dans sa fontaine aussi frais que la veille:</l>
<l>Eh bien! les Léonards volèrent ce poisson,</l>
<l>Mais Kemper n'oublie jamais leur trahison;</l>
<l>Sans jouir de leur crime, ils en portent la peine,</l>
<l><q rend="post">Et toujours le poisson nage dans la fontaine.</q></l>
<l rend="right"><bibl><title rend="italic">Les Bretons</title>&mdash;<author rend="smallcaps">Brizeux</author></bibl>.</l>
</lg>

<p>Quimper, or Quimper-Corentin, is prettily situated
at the junction of the rivers Odet and Stheire; its
Breton name, Kemper, signifying confluence. It was
long called Kemper-Odet. On the opposite side of
the river the hills, consisting of a mass of rocks,
<pb n="139"/><anchor id="Pg139"/>
covered with trees, rise to some height, and are
ascended by well-kept walks. The river runs straight
through the town, like a canal, edged by stone quays
and crossed by iron bridges, with avenues of trees on
each side. Trout can be seen in the sparkling stream;
and we watched a boy with a hook at the end of a
reel of black silk, hanging over the bridge, with a
piece of kneaded bread for bait. With this simple
tackle he contrived to hook a trout of tolerable size,
and let it run out the length of his silk line till he
had tired it out and landed it. The scenery of the
river below Quimper, flowing through a bed of
granite blocks, is, we were told, lovely, but we had
no time to visit it further down. The view from the
top of the wood-covered heights on the opposite
side is very extensive, looking down upon the town,
with its cathedral towers rising above, the promenade,
and the course of the river. At the end of the town
there is a manufactory of coarse pottery; but formerly
it produced ware of a finer quality.</p>

<p>The beautiful cathedral is the largest of the four
episcopal churches of Lower Brittany (Vannes, St.
Pol, Quimper, and Tréguier), and was principally
built in the fifteenth century. On the platform over
the finely sculptured porch, rich in foliage like the
Folgoët, placed between the two towers, is the equestrian
statue of King Gradlon, to whom is attributed
the introduction of the vine into Brittany. The statue
<pb n="140"/><anchor id="Pg140"/>
was decapitated in 1793, but restored ten years back.
On St. Cecilia's day companies of musicians used to
mount on the platform. While they sang a hymn
in praise of King Gradlon, one of the choristers,
provided with a flagon of wine, a napkin, and golden
hanap, mounted on the crupper of King Gradlon's
horse, poured out a cup of wine, which he offered
ceremoniously to the lips of the statue and then
drank himself, carefully wiped with his napkin the
moustachios of the king, placed a branch of laurel
in his hand, and then threw down the hanap in the
midst of the crowd below, in honour of the first
planter of the grape in Brittany. To whoever caught
the cup before it fell, and presented it uninjured
to the Chapter, was adjudged a prize of two hundred
crowns.</p>

<p>The two spires of the cathedral are modern, and
were built by an annual subscription of a sou for
five years, called the "sou du St. Corentin:" more
than 600<hi rend="italic">l.</hi> was thus raised. They have only been
lately finished.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 28. Beggar. Quimper.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image28.jpg">
    <head>28. Beggar. Quimper.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>The men about Quimper all wear the national
costume&mdash;enormous bragou-bras, or breeches of a
kind of white sail-cloth, a broad-brimmed felt hat,
long hair, falling over the shoulders, wooden shoes,
and a broad belt with metal buckle. Their woollen
jacket and waistcoat are edged with gay colours, and
have sometimes the itinerant tailor's name and the
<pb n="141"/><anchor id="Pg141"/>
date of the making of the garment, embroidered in
wool upon the breast. On gala days brown or blue
cloth bragous are worn, tied with coloured ribbons
at the knees, black leather gaiters with buttons, and
the sabots are replaced by leather shoes and costly
silver buckles. The national costume is more preserved
in Cornouaille than in the other parts of
Brittany.  The pen bas or cudgel, with a large
<pb n="142"/><anchor id="Pg142"/>
knob, like the Irish shillelah, is always ready at
hand:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Comme une conque immense ouverte au bord des eaux,</q></l>
<l>En Cornouaille est un port, il y vient cent bateaux.</l>
<l>Un sable jaune et fin couvre ses côtes plates,</l>
<l>Mais un infect amas de rogues, de morgates,</l>
<l>D'ossements de poissons sur le rivage épars,</l>
<l>La saumure qui filtre entre ses deux remparts,</l>
<l>Soulèvent tous les sens quand cette odeur saline</l>
<l>Arrive au voyageur qui tourne la colline,</l>
<l>Laissant derrière lui les taillis de Melven,</l>
<l>La belle lande d'or qui parfume Aven,</l>
<l>Et ces mouvants aspects de plaines, de montagnes</l>
<l>Que déroulent sans fin nos sauvages campagnes.</l>
<l>Plus de batteurs de seigle ici, plus de faucheurs,</l>
<l>Mais des canots chargés de mousses, de pêcheurs,</l>
<l>Partant et revenant avec chaque marée,</l>
<l>Et sur les quais du pont versant à leur rentrée,</l>
<l>Des sardines en tas, des congres, des merlus,</l>
<l>Des homards cuirassés, de gros crabes velus;</l>
<l>Et, du fond des paniers, mille genres énormes,</l>
<l>De toutes les couleurs et de toutes les formes,</l>
<l>Avec leur &oelig;il vitreux et leur museau béant,</l>
<l>Tous enfants monstrueux du grand monstre Océan.</l>
<l>Aussitôt le pressier les sèche, les empile,</l>
<l>Et quand leur grasse chair a degorgé son huile,</l>
<l>De Nantes à Morlaix cherchant les acheteurs,</l>
<l><q rend="post">On voit bondir sur mer les hardis caboteurs."</q></l>
<l rend="right"><bibl><title rend="italic">Les Bretons</title>&mdash;<author rend="smallcaps">Brizeux</author></bibl>.</l>
</lg>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 29. Concarneau, with Sardine Boats.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image29.jpg">
    <head>29. Concarneau, with Sardine Boats.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>Thus the Breton poet describes Concarneau, a
little fortified town, which has been called the St.
Malo of Cornouaille, and is celebrated for its sardine
fishery. The road lay through a wooded country,
with steep hills and valleys, intersected by streams:
<pb n="143"/><anchor id="Pg143"/>
on the right a view of the Bay of La Forêt, where
extensive oyster-culture is going on. After a tedious
journey with miserable horses, we reached Concarneau
at nine, a distance of little more than thirteen
miles, having set off a few minutes after four. Concarneau
proper is on a rocky island, surrounded by
fortifications, with eight or nine towers and thick
walls, and communicating with the mainland by
means of a drawbridge. This is called the "Ville
Close." It consists of only one street. When Duke
John IV. embarked from here for England, he left
<pb n="144"/><anchor id="Pg144"/>
Sir Robert Knollys governor of the duchy. The
constable Du Guesclin, after the surrender of Hennebont
and Quimperlé, took Concarneau by storm
and slew all the English garrison, except the captain,
who received quarter.</p>

<p>Opposite the island is the faubourg Sainte Croix,
which is more populous than the Ville Close, and
where all the business of the place is carried on.
The sardine fishery, from June to November, occupies
two-thirds of the population. From three to
four hundred vessels are employed with five men
to each boat. Calm weather is most favourable for
fishing. The sardines are taken in large seine nets,
one side floating with corks on the surface of the
water, the other falling vertically. The sardines,
attracted by the bait, try to force themselves through
the meshes of the net, and are caught by their gills.
The bait used is called "rogue:" the best is composed
of the roe of the cod-fish, pounded and steeped
in salt water for several days; sometimes the roe and
flesh of the <corr sic="mackarel">mackerel</corr> is used. Rogue is made in
Norway and Denmark, but principally at Drontheim,
and is very expensive, costing about sixpence the lb.;
hence an inferior bait is substituted, composed of
shrimps and other small crustacea, with fish salted,
and the heads of anchovies, all pounded and putrified
together. But this kind of decomposed bait is forbidden
by the fishery laws. The employment of it
<pb n="145"/><anchor id="Pg145"/>
accounts for the rareness of good sardines, as the
remaining of such a substance in the body of the
animal cannot fail of corrupting it. It is a pretty
sight to behold the little fleet employed in the sardine
fishery return in the evening, laden with the
results of the day's work. The fish, when landed,
are counted out into baskets, shaken in the water,
and taken up to one of the curing-houses: of these
there are about sixty in Concarneau. In the first
shed we saw above fifty women employed in taking
off their heads&mdash;"detêter" it is called&mdash;an operation
they effect with great dexterity. With one cut at
the back of the neck the head is separated and the
fish "éventré" at the same time.</p>

<p>The sardines are next placed in little wire trays,
with divisions like a double gridiron, and fried or
dipped in boiling oil, an operation principally performed
by the women of Pont l'Abbé, who are
supposed, like the Germans of our baking and
sugar-refining houses, to be peculiarly constituted
to resist heat. The gridirons are then hung up to
drain. The sardines are next packed in tin boxes,
cold oil poured over them, and the boxes soldered
down. From 800 to 900 boxes are placed in a
boiler and boiled for half an hour to test the boxes,
and those which leak are put aside. They are of
English tin, and the making of them is the winter's
occupation. Finally, the boxes are stamped with
<pb n="146"/><anchor id="Pg146"/>
the name of the establishment, and packed in deal
cases for exportation. The sardine is a very delicate
fish, and easily decays. It is only taken out of the
net with a rake (<hi rend="italic">raquette</hi>); in summer, numbers
are spoiled from being heaped in the boats, and
at whatever hour the boats come in the fish go
through the whole process of curing, as they will
not keep till the next day. Concarneau exports
from 15,000 to 20,000 barrels of sardines annually.
<pb n="147"/><anchor id="Pg147"/>
Only a part are "anchoitée," that is, preserved like
the anchovies of the Mediterranean, the others are
salted in casks; and quantities, only slightly salted,
are packed in baskets, to be sent to the provincial
markets. It is estimated that twelve hundred
million fish have been caught this year. The sardine
fishery extends along the whole western coast
of Brittany from Douarnenez to the Loire.</p>

<p>One of the curiosities of Concarneau is its aquarium,
under the direction of M. Guillon. It consists
of six cisterns, made by the blasting of the solid
rock, and comprising an area of large extent, within
a walled enclosure. In these cisterns the water is
renewed at each turn of the tide through narrow
openings in the wall. Three of these reservoirs are
reserved for fish, the others for crustacea&mdash;lobsters
and langoustes. Of these they keep from 10,000 to
15,000 at a time, and send them off daily, when
fattened, to Paris and the principal markets of
France. It was curious to see the dread shown by
the common lobster to the langouste. They all
were adhering to the sides of the reservoirs as if
afraid to encounter their more powerful companions.
Quantities of turbot, also reared for sale, were in
one of the cisterns, darting with the greatest rapidity
in the water when the keeper threw in pieces of
sardines for them to eat. At the end of these
cisterns is a building, with every arrangement for
<pb n="148"/><anchor id="Pg148"/>
the culture of fishes&mdash;rows of little troughs, and
other vessels, to contain them. Many of the fish
are so tame, they came immediately to the keeper
on his making a noise in the water with his fingers.
Here are fish of every description, and naturalists
have every facility of studying their habits. Among
others, we saw the graceful little sea-horse or hippocampus,
a native of the seas of Brittany as well as of
the Mediterranean.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 30. Dolmen. Trégunc.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image30.jpg">
    <head>30. Dolmen. Trégunc.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>From Concarneau to Quimperlé is a distance of
above eighteen miles. The road runs near the sea,
<pb n="149"/><anchor id="Pg149"/>
over a large tract of land covered with furze (ajonc),
which, in Brittany, grows from five to six feet high,
forming a solid impenetrable mass. Huge blocks of
granite are scattered about in every direction, jutting
<del>out</del> out from among the furze&mdash;menhirs, cromlechs,
and dolmens&mdash;a perfect wilderness of Celtic remains.
We drove over an extent of several miles of furze-covered
hills and heathy land. Before we reached
the village of Trégunc we stopped to see a large dolmen
on the side of the road, and further to the right
a rocking-stone, twelve feet long and nine feet thick,
standing about fifteen feet from the ground, the
second largest in Brittany. It is poised by a little projection,
like an inverted cone, upon another rock lying
half-buried in the ground. The upper block can
easily be set in motion by the hand. It is called by
the country people "La pierre aux maris trompés,"
and was formerly consulted by husbands to test the
fidelity of their wives. Even now the partner of a
faithless wife is said to be incapable of giving to the
stone the rocking motion it so easily receives from
another.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 31. Rocking Stone. Trégunc.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image31.jpg">
    <head>31. Rocking Stone. Trégunc.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>On the left we passed the majestic ruins of the
castle of Rustéphan, <hi rend="italic">i.&nbsp;e.</hi> Run, mound, of Stephen,
having been built by Stephen Count of Penthièvre
at the beginning of the twelfth century. It belonged
in the thirteenth to Blanche of Castile, the mother
of St. Louis. The present edifice dates from the
<pb n="150"/><anchor id="Pg150"/>
fifteenth. One of the sides remaining has a cylindrical
tower with pinnacled doorway, and the windows
have stone mullions.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 32. Château of Rustéphan.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image32.jpg">
    <head>32. Château of Rustéphan.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>Pursuing our road through blocks of granite, we
descended into the valley of Pontaven, the town of
millers, according to the old saying&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Pont Aven, ville de renom;</q></l>
<l><q rend="post">Quatorze moulins, deux maisons;</q></l>
</lg>

<p>a little port built upon rocks, at the foot of two
elevated mountains, over which are scattered masses
of granite boulders, obstructing the course of the
river which bounds over them. The banks are
lined with woody slopes; wooden bridges cross the
<pb n="151"/><anchor id="Pg151"/>
river at intervals; mills are established on the ledges
of the rocks on its sides; and the noise of the mills,
with that of the sparkling river tumbling through
the rocks in waterfalls, keep up a perpetual din.
Pontaven is celebrated for the quantity of its salmon:
so much is taken, that it used to be said that the
millers fattened their pigs upon this fish, which was
literally true, as they took the small salmon, called
glésils, in nets (<hi rend="italic">poches</hi>) for that purpose. Salmon now
is very dear. At the mouth of the Pontaven river
was a castle, whose proprietor had the privilege of
firing upon the fishing-boats which returned up the
river without giving to the castellan their finest
fish, which his steward went down to select. Pontaven
is seven and a half miles from Bannalec, the
nearest railway station. After remaining a few hours
we drove on to Quimperlé&mdash;in Breton, Kemper
(confluence) Ellé&mdash;so called, because it is at the
confluence of two rivers, the Elle and Isole:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Vous reverrai-je encore, ô fleuve de l'Ellé,</q></l>
<l>Vous, Izôle, où mon c&oelig;ur est toujours rappellé!</l>
<l>Les eaux sombres de l'Ellé, claire ceux de l'Izôle;</l>
<l><q rend="post">De ces bords enchantés je dirais chaque saule.</q></l>
<l rend="right"><bibl><author rend="smallcaps">Brizeux.</author></bibl></l>
</lg>

<p>Quimperlé is a great resort for fishing, the Quimperlé
salmon and trout being renowned throughout
Brittany, and even at Paris. This town is beautifully
situated, surrounded by high hills, in a valley, watered
<pb n="152"/><anchor id="Pg152"/>
by these bright rivers, the hills covered with gardens,
orchards, the Ursuline, Capucine, and other convents,
and crowned by the steeples of the Gothic
church of St. Michael. Its principal building is the
church of St. Croix, formerly that of a Benedictine
abbey, celebrated for its riches. The island of Belle-Ile-en-Mer
then belonged to it. It is a most singular
edifice, built in the eleventh century, after the model
of the church of the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem.
In 1862 it fell down, but is at present in course of
restoration, after its original plan. The old abbey
buildings are now occupied by the Prefecture. We
were given permission to pass through the convent
garden&mdash;the workmen and building materials having
blocked up the other entrances&mdash;to see the crypt in
which is the tomb of Saint Gurloës, first abbot of
Quimperlé. His effigy, with crosier in hand, his
feet resting on a dragon, lies upon a monument,
about three feet high, with an opening in the lower
part. The saint&mdash;Saint Urlose, as the Bretons call
him&mdash;is invoked principally for the gout, and persons
so afflicted crawl through the hole under the tomb,
where, suspended by chains, is an iron hook. They
twist a lock of their hair round this hook, and tear it
off with violence, hoping to propitiate the saint by
this mortification&mdash;evidently a remnant of heathen
times, when hair was sacrificed to deities or to the
memory of departed friends.</p>
<pb n="153"/><anchor id="Pg153"/>

<p>At Quimperlé was buried John de Montfort, rival
of Charles of Blois for the ducal crown. Sent to
Paris under a safe-conduct by the Dauphin John,
Philip of Valois had him shut up in the Louvre,
whence he escaped, after a captivity of three years,
to England. Edward III. espoused his cause and
granted him some troops. After an unsuccessful
attack upon Quimper, De Montfort died (1345) at
Hennebont, and was buried in the church of the Dominicans
at Quimperlé. He appointed Edward III.
guardian of his son, and Edward immediately occupied
Quimperlé and caused money to be struck in
his name. Lord Lewis of Spain, on the side of
Charles of Blois, made a descent upon Quimperlé
at the head of 6000 men, and pillaged the whole
country. On the news reaching Sir Walter Manny,
he hastened to meet the enemy, took possession of
their fleet, and made such carnage of the soldiers,
that they were all killed or taken prisoners, and
Lewis of Spain escaped with difficulty. The country
about Quimperlé is beautiful&mdash;wood and water in
every direction. The department of Finistère is
traversed by three hundred streams, and has an
extent of nearly four hundred miles of coast. We
were advised to go and see the rood-screen of the
chapel of Rosgrand, but had no time. We visited
the ruins of the church of St. Columban. Above
a round-arched doorway is a beautiful flamboyant
<pb n="154"/><anchor id="Pg154"/>
window, between two canopied niches. We next
walked up to the Place near St. Michel, where a
cattle-market was being held. The Breton peasants,
with their long shaggy uncombed hair hanging
round their shoulders&mdash;they comb and wash only
on fête days&mdash;their dirty canvas bragou bras, patched
coats, and sabots with tufts of straw crammed in,
looked more dirty than it is possible to imagine.
Cleanliness is the last of the Breton virtues. The
market and the fair are the two great events of the
country, and people flock from great distances to
sell their merchandise. But of all extraordinary
animals is the Breton pig, as tall as a donkey; a lean,
long-necked, ragged, bristly, savage-looking beast,
as ill kept as its master, and it runs like a greyhound
when approached. The Breton cow is very small,
small as the Kerry cows of Ireland, very pretty and
very productive. The Breton butter is proverbially
good, and is given out most liberally, in lumps as
big as loaves, at the tables-d'hôte. It is brought to
market in jars which the women carry upon their
heads. It is to the Queen-Duchess that Brittany,
and indeed all France, owes the privilege of eating
butter in Lent.  It was forbidden as animal food
by the laws of the Church, and oil, a vegetable
production, ordered as a substitute.  In 1491,
Anne solicited of Rome, for herself and household,
permission to eat butter on fast-days, alleging,
<pb n="155"/><anchor id="Pg155"/>
as a plea, that Brittany did not produce oil. Encouraged
by this favour, Brittany obtained the same
indulgence, and it was acquired successively by the
other provinces of France; but all are originally
indebted for the privilege to the good Queen-Duchess
Anne.</p>

<p>Next day, leaving the department of Finistère, we
entered that of Morbihan, and went by rail to Lorient
on the river Scorff, here joined by the Blavet. It
was formerly the seat of the French East India
Company; it is now one of the five military ports
of France and the residence of a maritime Prefect.
In the Place Bisson is the statue of a young officer
of the French navy, a native of Guemené-sur-Scorff
(Morbihan). When commanding, in 1827, a brig
in the Greek Archipelago, he was attacked by two
pirate vessels. Nine out of his fifteen men were
killed and himself wounded; the enemy crowded on
the deck. Desiring the survivors of his crew to
jump overboard, "Now," cried he to the pilot, "is
the moment for revenge!" and, setting fire to the
powder-magazine, he blew up himself, his ship, and
the pirates who had boarded her. Next morning
the bodies of seventy Greeks lay on the sea-shore,
showing the success of his self-devotion. The pilot,
who, with four sailors, was saved, received the decoration
of the Legion of Honour. On the pedestal
of Bisson's statue is an inscription, concluding with
<pb n="156"/><anchor id="Pg156"/>
these words: "Mort en héros, pour son roi et sa
patrie, ses amis le pleurent, la France le regrette, et
ses frères d'armes envient son sort."</p>

<p>From here we proceeded to Hennebont (Breton,
"old bridge"), famous, in the War of Succession, for
its heroic defence by Jeanne de Flandre, during the
captivity of her husband, Jean de Montfort, who had
been taken prisoner at Nantes and carried off to
Paris. Jeanne, who, as Froissart says, had the courage
of a man and the heart of a lion, placed herself
at the head of his party. Like another Maria Theresa,
she presented herself before the Breton lords, with
her infant son in her arms, and received their oaths
of allegiance. She then joined in the defence of
Hennebont, which was invested by Charles of Blois.
Clothed in armour and mounted on a war-horse, she
galloped up and down the streets, encouraging the
inhabitants. She ordered the ladies of her suite and
other women of the place to cut short their "keytels,"
carry the stones to the ramparts, and transport pots
of quick-lime to throw down upon the enemy.
At the head of 300 horsemen, the Countess, who
rode better than any squire, sallied out of the town,
attacked and burnt the enemy's camp, retreated to
Auray, and, a few days after, re-entered Hennebont,
with banners flying and trumpets sounding. But
the blockade was so close that provisions were
wanting, and the garrison compelled her to agree to
<pb n="157"/><anchor id="Pg157"/>
a capitulation, unless within three days assistance
arrived from England. The time was on the point
of expiring, and a herald had approached the gate of
the city to receive the keys in the name of Charles
of Blois, when the Countess, from her window, perceived
at sunrise the English fleet entering the port
in full sail. She exclaimed, "We are saved!" The
siege was raised, and the Countess, says Froissart,
kissed Sir Walter Manny and all his companions,
one after the other, two or three times, like a noble
and valiant dame. "Better," observed Charles, when
he heard the news, "that Jeanne, instead of her
lord, had been shut up in the Louvre." He left the
carrying on of the siege to Lewis of Spain, and proceeded
to Vannes and Auray. Some fragments of
walls are all that remain of Jeanne de Montfort's
castle, which was situated on a height on the other
side of the river in the "Vieille ville." The town on
the left bank of the Blavet is called the "Ville neuve"
and the "Ville close," being surrounded by walls.
Large vessels ascend the Blavet to Hennebont. It
is traversed by a light and elegant railway viaduct
of twelve arches. We saw on the quay a quantity of
red iron-ore from Bilbao.</p>

<p>Hennebont is a very pretty town; the principal
building is the church of Notre Dame-de-Paradis, of
the sixteenth century, with a fine square stone tower,
surmounted by a beautiful spire, and a tall porch,
<pb n="158"/><anchor id="Pg158"/>
forming one side of the tower. This handsome
church has lately been restored. The scenery about
the Blavet is very pretty&mdash;the banks wooded, and
fertile fields. We took a boat and rowed up the
river, passing the ruined Abbaye de la Joie, where a
hideous château has been built. This was a Cistercian
convent, founded in the thirteenth century by
Blanche of Navarre, wife of Duke John I. (<hi rend="italic">le Roux</hi>).
The chapel of Notre Dame-de-Paradis formerly belonged
to the convent; but when the parish church
was demolished, the Abbey ceded this chapel to the
town, reserving the privilege of a separate seat for
the Abbess, who, on the Sunday after St. John's day,
had her crosier carried before her in state by one of
her vassals at high mass and vespers.</p>

<p>From Hennebont we went by rail to Auray, and
established ourselves for some time in the Pavillon
d'en Haut, a most comfortable hotel. Auray is
situated on the slope of a hill, the streets narrow
and steep.</p>

<p>Our first drive was to Ste. Anne d'Auray, one of
the most famous places of pilgrimage in Brittany,
on account of its miraculous well and church. It
has been called the Mecca of Brittany. Here,
according to the legend in the seventeenth century,
Ste. Anne appeared to a countryman, and directed
him to dig in a certain field, where he would find
her image, and to build a chapel there. Guided by
<pb n="159"/><anchor id="Pg159"/>
a miraculous light, Nicolazic discovered the statue,
and erected a chapel on the site.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 33. Scala Sancta. Ste. Anne d'Auray.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image33.jpg">
    <head>33. Scala Sancta. Ste. Anne d'Auray.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>The spring where Ste. Anne first appeared is now
enclosed in a large basin of cut stone. Near it is the
church, in course of reconstruction. It stands in a
court surrounded by covered galleries for the shelter
of the pilgrims. Two flights of steps, called the
Scala Sancta (after that of St. John Lateran), lead
to a platform over the three entrance gates, upon
which is an altar surmounted by a cupola, where
mass can be heard by 20,000 persons. The steps
are ascended by the pilgrims barefooted, as they do
at Rome. The fête of Ste. Anne is celebrated on
the 26th of July, when pilgrims arrive from all
parts of Brittany to visit the miraculous statue, to
<pb n="160"/><anchor id="Pg160"/>
ascend the holy staircase, and to drink or wash in
the sacred fountain. It was a fête day when we
visited Ste. Anne. There was a large assemblage of
people, and booths were erected round the court,
where were sold rosaries and the wire brooches, with
scarlet and blue tufts of worsted, called <hi rend="italic">épinglettes</hi>,
worn by the Bretons in their hats as a token of their
having made a pilgrimage. We saw exhibited the
photograph of a young lady, said to have lately
recovered from paralysis after bathing in the holy
well. So world-wide is the fame of Ste. Anne
d'Auray that a traveller mentions having seen at
her shrine an embroidered altar-cloth of Irish
damask, with "Irlande: Reconnaissance à Sainte
Anne, 1850," woven into the pattern. The convent,
with its enclosure, the Scala Sancta, fountain, and
miraculous bush, all date from the seventeenth
century. There is a railway station for Ste. Anne,
within two miles of the church.</p>

<p>Returning to Auray, we went to the Chartreuse,
which owes its origin to the chapel of Saint Michel-du-Champ
founded (1382) by John de Montfort,
afterwards Duke John IV., on the spot where, in
1364, he gained the battle of Auray, which obtained
for him the duchy of Brittany. The chapel is close
to the railway station. In the fifteenth century
it was given to the Chartreux, and became a
monastery of the order which existed until the
<pb n="161"/><anchor id="Pg161"/>
Revolution. The present church was built at
the end of the reign of Louis XV.</p>

<p>The battle was fought on the marshy plain by
the side of the muddy river Alrée. It is fully
described by Froissart. In the two armies were
assembled all the chivalry of England, France and
Brittany. The Breton-English were commanded by
Sir John Chandos; the French, by Du Guesclin;
with de Montfort were also Sir Robert Knollys,
Sir Hugh Calverley and Olivier de Clisson; with
Charles of Blois, Du Guesclin, the Comte d'Auxerre,
the Viscomtes of Rohan and Tournemine, and Charles
de Dinan. At the moment of the battle, the white
greyhound of Charles of Blois deserted his master
and ran to his rival de Montfort, who was on
horseback, and caressed him, standing on his hind
paws. De Montfort recognised the dog by his
collar, ornamented with the arms of Brittany, and
this incident passed through his army as a favourable
omen. The dog was known to have been the gift
of a witch to Duke John the Good, who bequeathed
it to his niece Jeanne, wife of Charles of Blois.</p>

<p>Both armies heard mass, confessed themselves,
and received the Communion before they opened
the battle. The war cry of Charles was, "In the
name of God and St. Ives," Montfort repeated
the motto of his family, "Malo mori quam f&oelig;dari"
(better to die than be sullied), and his troops
<pb n="162"/><anchor id="Pg162"/>
advanced to the onset to the cry of "Malo." Both
chiefs wore the ermines emblazoned on their armour
and their standards; and relatives and friends were
ranged in battle array against each other. Following
the tactics which had been successful at Cressy and
Poitiers, Chandos quietly awaited the impetuous
attack of the Franco-Breton army, which was unable
to shake their antagonists, who returned the charge.
The melée was fearful, but the battle was in favour
of the English. Charles performed prodigies of
valour. In vain Rohan and Laval rallied round
him with the flower of the Breton knights; the
prince was a prisoner, and an English soldier
despatched him by plunging a dagger into his
throat. Du Guesclin sustained all the force of the
fight with his heavy steel mace, his battle-axe and
his sword; but his mace was broken, the handle
of his axe carried away, his sword shivered, and he
had no other weapon left but his gauntlets, and was
nearly overpowered by numbers, when Chandos,
who fought with a battle-axe, entreated him to
surrender, "Messire Bertrand, rendez-vous, cette
journée n'est pas vôtre; il faut céder à la fortune,
une autre fois vous serez plus heureux." Convinced
of the truth of Chandos' words, Du Guesclin
surrendered to him the handle of his sword. Beaumanoir
was among the prisoners; and Clisson, who
never left the field, lost an eye in the conflict.</p>
<pb n="163"/><anchor id="Pg163"/>

<p>A hair shirt was found, with thick knotted cords
round the waist, upon the body of Charles, for he
delighted in deeds of mortification. He often used
to place pebbles in his shoes, and once walked two
leagues barefoot in the snow to visit the relics of
St. Ives, in consequence of which he was laid up for
three months. He was buried at Guingamp, and
his widow and children desired his canonisation; but
de Montfort, fearing such a step would render him
unpopular in Brittany, persuaded Pope Gregory XI.
to refuse it.</p>

<p>Du Guesclin, after he recovered his liberty, was
destined, three years later, to be a second time the
prisoner of the English at Navarrete, when the Black
Prince replaced on his throne the cruel, perfidious
Don Pedro. When Sir Hugh Calverley asked for
the freedom of Du Guesclin, he was met by the
reply, "Il ne faut pas lâcher ce dogue de Bretagne,
si fatal aux Anglais." It was represented to the
Black Prince that report ascribed his detention to
fear or jealousy; upon which he sent for Du Guesclin,
who told him he was tired of listening to the
squeaking of the mice in his prison, and longed to
hear the nightingales of Brittany. He named his
own ransom at 100,000 florins, the Black Prince
reduced it to 60,000; and the Princess of Wales
contributed 20,000. It was paid by Charles V.
"Had it been ten millions," says his biographer,
<pb n="164"/><anchor id="Pg164"/>
"France would have paid it all." In the Musée
des Archives at Paris is preserved an order of
Charles V. to his treasurer, to prepare 30,000
Spanish doublons, to be paid to the Prince of Wales
for the ransom of Du Guesclin, adding, "il touche
notre honneur grandement." This is the most
ancient royal autograph in the collection. Charles
calls him Bertran de Caclin. The Constable, in a
deed of gift of the Château of Cachant to the Duke
of Anjou, signs "Bertrain."</p>

<p>A school for deaf and dumb occupies the Chartreuse,
directed by the S&oelig;urs de la Sagesse. We
were shown round by a deaf and dumb guide, who
made us write on his slate what we could not
explain on our fingers, and he also wrote his reply.
He showed us a series of paintings, copies of Le
S&oelig;ur's Life of St. Bruno in the Louvre, which
are said to have been executed by the monks
of the Chartreuse. Attached to the church is a
sepulchral chapel containing the bones of the victims
of the unfortunate descent on Quiberon, when the
immense armament of French royalists who were
landed in British ships, perished. They were commanded
by d'Hervilly, an old officer of the Constitutional
Guard of Louis XVI., and he had for
lieutenant Count Charles de Sombreuil, whose sister
had rendered the name illustrious by her heroism
in the Reign of Terror. They landed at Carnac,
<pb n="165"/><anchor id="Pg165"/>
where Georges Cadoudal and a band of Chouans
awaited their arrival. Hoche, at the head of a republican
army, hastened to meet them. Every
thing depended upon their rapidity of action, but
three days were lost in disputes about the command
among the emigrant generals. They took possession
of the peninsula of Quiberon, a strip of land
about six miles long by three wide, united to the
mainland by a narrow tongue of sand a league in
extent, called the Falaise. Fort Penthièvre, placed
on the plateau of a steep rock, and bathed on
each side by the sea between the peninsula and the
Falaise, defends the approach by land. The emigrant
army was protected by the English fleet which lay
in the bay of Quiberon, one of the safest and most
sheltered on the coast. The defence of Fort Penthièvre
was entrusted to some republican soldiers
taken from the English prisons. In a night encounter
d'Hervilly was killed.  Hoche marched upon
Fort Penthièvre, which was given up to him by the
traitor soldiers. La Puisaye threw himself into a
boat and gained the English fleet. The emigrant
army was thrown into the greatest disorder; the
"Bleus," as the republican soldiers were called,
pressed close upon them, and Sombreuil, driven
to the water's edge, and deserted by his troops,
offered to capitulate, on the condition that the lives
should be spared of all save himself. "Yes," cried
<pb n="166"/><anchor id="Pg166"/>
the republicans with one voice. They demanded
that the fire of the English corvette should cease,
and there being no boat at hand, Gesril du Papeu
swam to the English ship, and having delivered his
message, returned and surrendered himself prisoner.
It is said that Hoche considered the capitulation
sacred, but Tallien arrived armed with full powers
from the Convention to treat the emigrants according
to law. The prisoners had been conducted to
Auray; Hoche, unwilling to be the witness of acts
he could not prevent, returned to Brest. Not one
French officer would consent to be a member of
the military commission who were to try, or rather
condemn, the captives. It was composed of Belgians
and Swiss, and it was difficult to induce the soldiers
to execute the sentence. Sombreuil and a few others
were shot at Vannes. The execution of the rest
took place in a field now called the Champ des
Martyrs. They were brought out in twenties, and
placed before a trench, dug beforehand, and shot.
The massacre lasted three weeks. In all there were
952 victims. Two chapels have been erected; the
one attached to the Chartreuse, and the other on
the Champ des Martyrs. That in the Chartreuse
has inscribed over the front, in letters of gold,
"France in tears has raised it." The interior walls
are overlaid with black and white marble, with two
marble bas-reliefs by David of Angers: one representing
<pb n="167"/><anchor id="Pg167"/>
the Duc d'Angoulême praying over the
bones of the victims in 1814, when they were
transferred from the Champ des Martyrs to the
Chartreuse; the other, the laying of the first stone
of the mausoleum by the Duchesse d'<corr sic="Angoulme">Angoulême</corr>
in 1823. In 1829 the solemn inauguration of the
expiatory monument took place; and it must have
been touching to the spectators to have assisted
at the ceremony with the Duchesse d'<corr sic="Angoulme">Angoulême</corr>,
daughter of Louis XVI. and Marie Antoinette,
niece of the martyr saint the Princess Elizabeth,
and herself long subjected to imprisonment and
indignities. Only one year after this ceremony she
again took the road to exile, where she ended her
troublous life, a pattern of piety and resignation&mdash;</p>

<p rend="margin-left:12"><q>Sa mort fut le soir d'un beau jour.</q></p>

<p>In the centre of the mausoleum is the vault containing
the bones, and over it a sarcophagus on a
pedestal, upon which are inscribed the names of the
victims. On the sarcophagus are busts of Sombreuil
and the other chiefs of the expedition; and a
profile of Monseigneur d'Hercé, Bishop of Dol, one
of the victims. Of the bas-reliefs on the mausoleum,
one represents the heroic act of Gesril du Papeu,
with the words "I hoped in God, and shall not be
afraid;" the other, the landing of the emigrants on
the shore of Carnac, with "All my brothers are
<pb n="168"/><anchor id="Pg168"/>
dead for Israel;"&mdash;these inscriptions are all in Latin.
Others are round the monument:&mdash;"Unworthily
slain for God and the King;"&mdash;"Precious before
God is the blood of his saints;"&mdash;"For our lives
and our laws;"&mdash;"You will receive a greater glory
and an eternal name." Our deaf and dumb guide let
a light down into the vault to show us the bones of
the victims, collected in one common sepulchre.
The Chartreuse convent therefore commemorates
two great tragedies of history: in ancient times the
battle of Auray, which caused the death of Charles
of Blois, the captivity of Du Guesclin, and the
slaughter of the flower of Breton chivalry by the
swords of their fellow Bretons. In modern days,
the massacre of the royalists at Quiberon&mdash;both the
horrible consequence of civil war.</p>

<p>We then repaired to the "Champ des Martyrs,"
where took place the execution of the royalists. At
the end of an avenue of silver firs is the expiatory
chapel, with a granite portico, in the Doric style.
Above is inscribed, "It is here they fell," and "The
memory of the just shall be eternal."</p>

<p>On the tomb is written, "Tombeau des royalistes
courageux defenseurs de l'autel et du trône, ils tombèrent
martyrs de leurs nobles efforts. Quel Français
pénetré des droits de la couronne ignore ce
qu'il doit à ces illustres morts."</p>

<p>The inn Pavilion d'en Haut is particularly comfortable
<pb n="169"/><anchor id="Pg169"/>
and reasonable, and the people very obliging.
Wishing to taste the crêpes we had seen before,
they procured some, and gave them to us hot&mdash;we
thought they resembled a greasy crumpet.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 34. Champ des Martyrs. Auray.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image34.jpg">
    <head>34. Champ des Martyrs. Auray.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>Auray is a good central point for visiting the
Celtic remains:&mdash;menhirs, dolmens, cromlechs, all of
which are as plentiful here as are calvaries, shrines,
and churches in Léon. They seem all concentrated
<pb n="170"/><anchor id="Pg170"/>
on these dreary wild landes, sometimes covered with
furze bushes, at others strewn along the coast.</p>

<p>Next day we drove to Locmariaker, nine miles
from Auray, through Crach. On the right is the
river or estuary of that name; over which a bridge is
contemplated at La Trinité, to communicate with
Carnac. Locmariaker is at the extremity of the
peninsula formed by the rivers of Crach and Auray,
at the entrance of the Morbihan. It must have
been a place of some importance in the time of the
Roman occupation of Gaul, as there are the remains
of a circus, whose walls now enclose the cemetery,
of a Gallo-Roman house, with baths, frescoed walls,
and marble pavement. We picked up some fragments
of Roman bricks which lie strewn upon the
ground in great abundance. Midst these Roman
remains are gigantic menhirs, barrows, and dolmens,
vestiges of a still more ancient race. Locmariaker
has two large tumuli, both vast tombs.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 35. Sculptured Stone. Manné er Hroëck. Locmariaker.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w25" url="images/image35.jpg">
    <head>35. Sculptured Stone. <lb />Manné er Hroëck. <lb />Locmariaker.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>We first visited the Manné-er-Hroëk, the Montagne
de la Fée, or de la Femme, which bears in the
marine charts the name of "Butte de César," for
it was the fashion with antiquaries to attribute to
Cæsar and the Romans every Celtic monument,
although bearing no resemblance whatever to any
work of these conquerors. The Montagne de la
Fée is a galgal or tumulus of elliptic form, about
thirty feet high, formed of dry stones.  It was
<pb n="171"/><anchor id="Pg171"/>
opened in 1863, and found to contain a sepulchral
chamber or dolmen, outside of which lay a granite
stone above three feet long, inscribed with various
figures, and, in the middle, a cartouche, with
hatchet-shaped characters. There were also found
a number of celts (stone hatchets or knives), a green
jasper necklace, and some glass beads, which have
been transferred to the museum at
Vannes.  The guide who furnished
the light and showed us the grotto
is the widow of a Polish officer. She
had a Scotch terrier, which she wanted
us to accept.  The legend of the
mound is this:&mdash;A widow had the
misfortune of losing her only solace,
her son, compelled by law to embark
for foreign lands. Years rolled by;
he did not return. All said he was
lost; but the heart of a mother hopes
for ever, and the sad Armorican went
every day to the point of Kerpenhir,
whence she surveyed the ocean, and searched
the depths of the horizon with tearful eyes for the
purple sail<note place="foot">
The sailors of the Morbihan cover their sails with a substance
which makes them of a dark red colour.</note>
which was to bring joy and peace to her
dwelling. One day, when she was returning sad as
<pb n="172"/><anchor id="Pg172"/>
usual to her desolate home, she was accosted by an
old woman, who enquired the cause of her troubles;
and, on hearing them, advised her to heap a pile of
stones, so that, mounting on the summit, she might
see to a greater distance, and perhaps discern the
long looked-for vessel. During the whole night the
two women worked, and carried in their aprons the
stones they gathered on the heath. In the morning
their task was finished, and the Bretonne was scared
to see the enormous heap that had been piled together;
but the other quieted her fears, and helped
her to climb to the top, whence soon the happy
mother beheld the vessel of her son. The fairy, her
assistant, had disappeared. This story evidently
bears a vague tradition of this tumulus having been
raised by a woman, and of some maritime expedition
made by him for whom it was probably
destined. The name of fairy is attached in Brittany
to everything&mdash;mountains, springs, grottoes,
rocks; every accident in nature is explained by a
fairy origin.</p>

<p>The next object we saw is also attributed to the
fairies, the great menhir, called Men-er-Groách, or
stone of the fairies. It is the largest menhir known,
but it has been broken into three pieces, some say
by thunder. Put together, it measures about 67
feet in length, and is 16 feet in diameter. The
wonder is how it was placed there, for it is little less
<pb n="173"/><anchor id="Pg173"/>
than the obelisk of St. Peter's, which took 800 to
900 men and 70 horses nearly a year to raise,&mdash;a
work which was the great triumph of Fontana the
engineer. The menhir is estimated to be one-third
the height of Notre Dame at Paris.</p>

<p>Lying also prostrate on the ground, by the side
of it, is a smaller menhir, which is, however, above
30 feet long.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 36. Hatchet-shaped Sculpture. Dol des Marchands. Locmariaker.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w25" url="images/image36.jpg">
    <head>36. Hatchet-shaped <lb />Sculpture. Dol des <lb />Marchands. Locmariaker.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>Close to these gigantic menhirs is the large dolmen
(Breton, <hi rend="italic">daul</hi>, table, and <hi rend="italic">m&oelig;n</hi>, stone), known
as the "Table de César," or the "Dol des Marchands."
We walked under it to see
the curious hatchet-shaped figure sculptured
on one of the upper stones. The
common belief is that these dolmens or
table-stones were Druidic altars, and the
guides will show you the furrows for
the blood of the human sacrifice to run
down; but human bones having been
found under some of these dolmens,
lead one to suppose they were tombs.
In the Scandinavian countries the peasants
call them "Giants' Graves."</p>

<p>The other great tumulus of Locmariaker is the
Mont Heleu or Manné-Lud, also opened in 1863,
and supposed to have been the sepulchre of a number
of persons, perhaps of a whole generation. It
has, like the Montagne de la Feé, a galleried chamber
<pb n="174"/><anchor id="Pg174"/>
or dolmen, the floor formed of an enormous
slab across the centre, on which is a sculpture
resembling a celt; other sculptured stones were found
in the same chamber. At the other end of the dolmen
was an avenue of stones, some supporting the
skeletons of horses' heads. This tumulus was probably
the tomb of some great warrior: the horses'
skeletons were the remains of a sacrifice, and the
human bones of beings who had been immolated
to accompany the earthly remains of their great
chief to another world.</p>

<p>We took a boat for Gavr' Inis, or the Goat
Island, and embarked on the Morbihan (Breton,
Little Sea), an inland sea, that gives its name to the
department. Shut out from the ocean by the two
peninsulas of Locmariaker and Rhuys, which form
a narrow gully between the points of Kerpenhir and
Port Navalo, this sea contains an archipelago of
islands, numbering, according to tradition, as many
as the days in the year. Of these, the Ile aux
Moines is the largest. The arms of the sea forming
the rivers of Auray and Vannes run into it. The
navigation of the Morbihan is very dangerous, the
ocean entering it by this narrow opening in three
distinct currents; it is an endless labyrinth of rocks
and water; its granite shores, torn by the sea, are
indented with creeks, capes, and inlets.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 37. Entrance to the Tumulus of Gavr' Inis.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image37.jpg">
    <head>37. Entrance to the Tumulus of Gavr' Inis.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<pgIf output="txt">
<then><p>[Illustration: 38/39. Sculptured Stones. Gavr' Inis.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image3839.jpg">
    <head>Fig. 38/39. Sculptured Stones. Gavr' Inis.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>
Gavr' Inis is a small island, surmounted by a tumulus,
<pb n="175"/><anchor id="Pg175"/>
which forms a conspicuous object, seen from all
the mounds and dolmens around. It is a galgal of
heaped stones, in the centre of which is a dolmen or
galleried chamber, which was opened in 1832, and
is the most curious monument in the Morbihan.
The gallery, with its square sepulchral chamber at
the end, is above fifty feet long and about five wide,
composed of two rows of granite menhirs, or upright
stones, which form the sides, with horizontal stones
resting on them, ending in a chamber consisting of
eight menhirs, with an enormous slab, thirteen feet
<pb n="176"/><anchor id="Pg176"/>
long, placed over them horizontally to form the
roof, and another, nearly as large, to form the floor.
These stones are of granite, and no cement is used
to unite them.  They are covered with incised
figures of unknown meaning: sculptures in concentric
whorls or circles, as if tattoed like the cheek
of a New Zealander; and the only forms to be distinguished
are serpent-like figures, and the representation
of an axe, similar to those to be seen in
the Grotte des Fées, the Dol des Marchands, and
the Manné-Lud. In one of the side stones of the
chamber are two handle-looking projections, with a
recess behind, said, probably erroneously, to be the
place where the victims were bound. No celts or
other objects of antiquity were found in the grotto,
which must have been previously rifled of its contents.
<pb n="177"/><anchor id="Pg177"/>
These sculptures cannot have been executed
without the use of metal instruments. There are
also Celtic remains in the Ile aux Moines and other
islands of the Morbihan, but our guide did not
encourage us to extend our sail to visit them. The
current between the island and Port Navalo is sometimes
of great rapidity and violence.</p>

<p>Next day we went to Carnac to see its marvellous
avenues of menhirs. The Celtic remains here are of
a different character from those of Locmariaker.
Here there is quantity, at Locmariaker size. The
monuments of the last are covered with strange
characters and signs; in Carnac they are all plain
and silent, according to the laws of the Druids, who
prohibited writing, in the fear of thereby divulging
their mysteries, and also that the people might not
neglect to cultivate their memories.</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Tout cela eut un sens, et traduisit</q></l>
<l>Une pensée; mais la clé de ce mystère,</l>
<l>Où est elle? et qui pourrait dire aujourd'hui</l>
<l><q rend="post">Si jamais elle se retrouvera?</q>&mdash;<bibl><author rend="smallcaps">Cayat Delandre</author></bibl>.</l>
</lg>

<p>Before reaching Carnac, we stopped at Kermario
on the left, and got out of the carriage to inspect
the army of large menhirs about the windmill.
They are arranged in eleven rows, some sixteen feet
high, placed with the small end in the ground.
They are all of a sombre grey, many of them
clothed with straggling lichens of various species.
<pb n="178"/><anchor id="Pg178"/>
This wild heathy tract was covered with the blue
flower of the dwarf gentian, and strewed all over
with menhirs. Before arriving at Carnac, the road
passes the avenues of Menec, all running in the
same direction as those of Kermario, from east to
west: among these are some of the largest stones.
The third large group, at <corr sic="Erdevan">Erdeven</corr>, we saw on our
way from Carnac back to Auray by another road.</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">D'un passé sans mémoire incertaines reliques,</q></l>
<l><q rend="post">Mystères d'un vieux monde en mystères écrits.</q></l>
<l rend="right"><bibl><author rend="smallcaps">Lamartine</author></bibl>.</l>
</lg>

<p>We do not pretend to enter into the various
explanations attempted of this wonderful monument.
The legend at Carnac is, that St. Cornély,
pursued by an army of pagans, fled towards the
sea; finding no boat at hand, and on the point of
being taken, he transformed the soldiers into stones.</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l rend="right"><q rend="pre">Les soldats de deux rois idolâtres</q></l>
<l>Poursuivaient notre saint dejà l'ami des pâtres,</l>
<l>Et sur un chariot trainé par de grands b&oelig;ufs</l>
<l>Le bons vieux Cornéli se sauvait devant eux;</l>
<l>Or, voici que la mer, terrible aussi l'arrête;</l>
<l>Alors, le saint prélat, du haut de sa charrette</l>
<l>Tend la main: les soldats, tels qu'ils étaient rangés,</l>
<l>En autant de menhirs, voyez! furent changés.</l>
<l>Telle est notre croyance, et personne n'ignore</l>
<l>Que le patron des b&oelig;ufs c'est ici qu'on l'honore;</l>
<l>Aux lieux où la charrette et le saint ont passés,</l>
<l><q rend="post">Le froment pousse encor plus vert et plus pressé.</q></l>
<l rend="right"><bibl><author rend="smallcaps">Brizeux</author></bibl>.</l>
</lg>

<p>St. Cornély is the patron of bullocks. When a
<pb n="179"/><anchor id="Pg179"/>
beast is ill, his owner buys an image of St. Cornély,
and hangs it up in the stable till its recovery. In
the church of Carnac is a series of fresco paintings
portraying the principal events of his life, and outside,
a sculpture representing him between two bullocks.
The head of St. Cornély is preserved here;
the pulpit is of forged iron, and in the sacristy is
shown a silver gilt monstrance of the Louis XIV.
period, with a representation of the Supper at Emmaus,
chased in relief round the foot. We walked
to the Mont St. Michel, a tumulus of stones with
sepulchral dolmen, opened in 1862, but now closed.
It was found to contain objects of the "Stone" age,
a number of jade celts from four to sixteen inches
long, some perforated beads and pendents for a
necklace, and there were traces of burnt bones.
Like most monuments of Celtic origin, these tumuli
were regarded with religious veneration; and the
first teachers of Christianity, to enlist the old worship
to the cause of truth, marked each of these monuments
with the symbol of the new faith. Thus the
cross was placed on the menhir, and a chapel built
upon Mont St. Michel, and, as we have before seen,
on Mont Dol, and other high places of Druidic
worship. The little chapel dedicated to St. Michel,
which surmounts the tumulus, forms a conspicuous
landmark from every point, and commands a most
extensive view over the stones of Carnac ranged in
<pb n="180"/><anchor id="Pg180"/>
their eleven lines, on a treeless plain, the Morbihan,
and the long dreary peninsula of Quiberon.</p>

<p>Returning by another route, we alighted at the
inn at Plouharnel to see a collection of jade celts,
gold torques, and necklaces of beads, found in the
neighbourhood, belonging to the landlord, M. Bail,
who has them all arranged in a frame. They were
discovered in a group of dolmens near the village,
opened in 1830, consisting of three grottos or allées
couvertes, a kind of triple dolmen, covered over with
a mound. The central grotto and gallery had been
opened before. The second dolmen had also a grotto
or allée couverte, in which was found an earthen pot,
containing ashes and three gold necklaces. In the
third were some fragments of pottery. Three gold
necklaces, composed each of a single plate of metal,
an inch and a half wide, with fragments of the
earthen vessels in which they were found, together
with stone celts and some pieces of bronze, extracted
from the dolmen, we afterwards saw exhibited in the
"Musée du Travail" of the Universal Exhibition of
1867. These dolmens belong to a much later period
of civilisation than those of Locmariaker&mdash;to the
"Bronze" Age.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 40. Dolmen of Corcorro.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image40.jpg">
    <head>40. Dolmen of Corcorro.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>The number of dolmens in the Morbihan is estimated
at 250. In the department of Finistère they
are set at double the number. All are supposed to
have been originally covered with earth. The bodies
<pb n="181"/><anchor id="Pg181"/>
are more frequently buried than burnt. The dolmens
contain implements of stone and bone, occasionally
gold and bronze, but never iron. To judge from
the comparative quantities found in the different
departments, it may be assumed that they are the
work of people who have entered France from the
west, and have gradually worked their way by the
rivers and valleys further up the country. In this
secluded spot we found a large English family
located, ten in number; they had been living there
several months. Before reaching Erdeven, at Kerserho,
on a large lande or heathy plain, we arrived
at another series of the great Carnac army of stones,
of which they are a continuation. They are arranged
in nine parallel rows, as may be clearly distinguished
by standing upon one of the stones; but the lines
are rather interrupted by hedges and ditches. Some
are menhirs planted vertically on the end, others
enormous blocks simply laid upon the soil. They
extend half a league from north to south, more
numerous than Carnac, but generally not so tall, the
highest from ten to twelve feet, but very large. The
road is strewed with Druidic monuments. At Corcorro,
between Plouharnel and Erdeven, on a farm,
a short distance off the road, is a dolmen, the largest
in the Morbihan. Its original length appears to
have been 45 feet; the part preserved is 24 feet by
12 feet wide, and is covered with two slabs: one of
<pb n="182"/><anchor id="Pg182"/>
these is enormous, about six feet wide. It is used as
a cart-shed, and, when we saw it, contained bundles
of hemp and a hemp-breaker. One of the top
stones overhangs the others, showing the dolmen
to have been originally larger. A number of ragged
children clustered upon the top, as if they had been
accustomed to group themselves for a picture. They
effectually prevented any of us sketching the dolmen,
for, as soon as we began to draw, they all, in
number about forty, came down from their height and
pressed closely around us. From Auray we took a
<pb n="183"/><anchor id="Pg183"/>
carriage to Vannes, a tidal port, one league from the
gulf of Morbihan, and capital of that department.</p>

<p>Its people, the Veneti, were the head of the
Armorican confederation, and commanded the fleet
in time of war. Their vessels had sails of prepared
skins, their cables were chains of iron. They traded
with the Scilly Islands, and brought back tin, copper,
skins, slaves, and dogs, objects of traffic with other
nations. The Armorican confederation made a
vigorous resistance against Cæsar, who sent round
for the Roman fleet and beat them in a naval battle
in the Morbihan sea. The Romans had attached
to their ships large sharp scythes which mowed down
masts and rigging, and a dead calm rendering the
enemy's ships immovable, they were soon taken,
burnt, or sunk. This battle ended the war with the
maritime states of the west. Cæsar showed little
mercy to the conquered: all the senators were put
to death, and the rest of the population sold by
auction to furnish the slave-markets of Italy.</p>

<p>We walked to the promenade, called the "Garenne,"
where Sombreuil, Renée de Hercé, bishop
of Dol, and twenty-two others of the emigrants,
were shot. Sombreuil was about twenty-six or
twenty-seven years of age, a native of Périgord. He
always persisted in the same account of the capitulation.
His last words were:-"Si j'avais pu imaginer
que des militaires pussent manquer à leur parole
<pb n="184"/><anchor id="Pg184"/>
donnée sur le champ de bataille, je n'aurais jamais
consenti à une capitulation; elle me cause des regrets
amers qui me suivront jusqu'au tombeau. Adieu,
Messieurs, nous trouverons justice et clémence devant
un tribunal où la fraude des hommes ne saurait
jamais parvenir." A republican officer offered to bandage
his eyes: "Non," he exclaimed, "je veux voir
mon ennemi jusqu'au dernier instant." Requested
to kneel, Sombreuil answered: "Je le veux bien;
mais je fais observer que je mets un genou pour
mon Dieu, et l'autre pour mon roi." Thus ended
the most ill-fated expedition that history has ever had
to record.</p>

<p>The cathedral of Vannes has a richly-sculptured
north porch of Kersanton stone, and another, facing
the Rue des Trois Duchesses. Also, a Renaissance
chapel, called the Chapelle du Saint Sacrament or
du Pardon, with a hideous roof replacing the original.
Adjoining are the remains of the elegant cloisters of
the cathedral, with basket-handled arcades of the
fifteenth century. In the cathedral is also the chapel
of St. Vincent Ferrier, the great preacher of the
fifteenth century, whose labours extended over
almost every country of Europe&mdash;Italy, Germany,
France, Switzerland, and Great Britain. San Vicente
Ferrar, a Dominican monk, was the son of an attorney,
originally of Valencia, in Spain, of which city
he is the tutelar saint. In Spain he led the way in
<pb n="185"/><anchor id="Pg185"/>
preaching a crusade against the Jews and Moors,
who were persecuted by the Inquisition with the
most cruel bigotry. Invited to Brittany by Duke
John V., he fixed himself at Vannes, where, after
having evangelised the province, he died in 1419.
He was buried in the cathedral. The Duchess
Jeanne de France, daughter of Charles VI., was
present at his deathbed, and insisted on laying him
out. By her own desire, she was buried at his feet.
Philip II., King of Spain, desired his relics, but did
not succeed in obtaining them. The little house in
which St. Vincent Ferrier lived is preserved (No. 13,
Rue des Orfèvres). A tiny room, up a narrow staircase,
is now converted into a chapel, in which are
shown the stone which served him as a pillow, his
lamp, and other relics.</p>

<p>The Maison du Parlement or Château Gaillau is
a curious old building, with its entrance by a stone
staircase and turret. Vannes was the usual residence
of Dukes John IV. and V., and had formerly three
châteaux: La Motte, of which the Hôtel de la Préfecture
occupies the site; Plaisance, half a mile out
of the town, where Duke Francis I. died; and La
Hermine, scene of John IV.'s treacherous imprisonment
of the Constable Clisson, which was razed in
1614. It had two towers&mdash;one demolished in 1770, the
other still standing, called the "Tour du Connétable,"
because it was within its walls he imprisoned Clisson.
<pb n="186"/><anchor id="Pg186"/>
The Duke had resolved on his death, to prevent the
marriage of Clisson's daughter Marguerite to Jean
de Bretagne, Count de Penthièvre, son of Charles
of Blois.<note place="foot">
Jean and his brother were twenty-eight years in captivity
in England. The King offered them their liberty, if they
would acknowledge him as their suzerain lord; but they would
not buy their freedom at the expense of their allegiance to the
King of France, who had always been the friend of their house.
His brother died in prison: Jean was ransomed through the
medium of Robert de Vere, Duke of Ireland, by the Constable
Clisson, that he might marry his daughter; but he only
exchanged his captivity to pass the remainder of his days
in wars against his suzerain, to gratify the ambition and resentments
of his wife.</note> The story is well related by d'Argentré.</p>

<p>The Duke of Brittany summoned his barons and
knights to a council at Vannes, and entertained them
in the Castle de la Motte. He behaved in the most
friendly manner, and invited the Constable, the
Lords of Laval and de Beaumanoir, to see the castle
of Hermine he was building. He led the Constable
by the hand through the chambers, and when they
arrived at the keep, said, "Sir Oliver, there's not a
man who understands masonry so well as yourself;
enter and examine the walls well, and if you say it is
properly built, it shall remain." The unsuspecting
Constable ascended the staircase, when the door was
closed upon him and he was seized and loaded with
three pairs of fetters. The Duke ordered him to
be put into a sack, his hands and feet tied, and to be
<pb n="187"/><anchor id="Pg187"/>
thrown secretly at night into the sea. But the Constable
owed his life to the loyalty of Jean Bazvalen,
who, like another Hubert, did not obey his master's
commands, the laws of his sovereign being less sacred
in his eyes than the dictates of humanity and honour.
Clisson was set at liberty, on agreeing to pay 100,000
livres and to surrender the town of Jugon and some
other fortresses. This perfidious attempt occasioned
a war of three years, and was retaliated by Clisson's
daughter and grandsons upon Duke John V.</p>

<p>The Tour du Connétable, which formed the north-east
angle of the Château de la Hermine, is now
used as a museum of Celtic antiquities, and contains
various objects collected in the tumuli of the Morbihan.
We observed one very large jade celt, eighteen
inches long, found, we understood, in the Butte de
Tumiac. At Vannes the States of Brittany held
their sittings, and here took place the union of that
province with France, 1532.</p>

<p>About twelve miles from Vannes is Korn-er-hoët,
demesne of the Princess Baciocchi, cousin of the
Emperor. It was formerly surrounded by woods
and the interminable lande of Lanvaux, which
stretches its desolate length along the Morbihan
from Baud to Rochefort. This district had been,
from time immemorial, the abode of some eighty
families of gipsies, who lived there in clay huts under
the rule of a chieftain. The sight of this barren
<pb n="188"/><anchor id="Pg188"/>
wilderness had so impressed the Princess Baciocchi,
in a tour she made in Brittany in the year 1857, that
she obtained the sanction of the Emperor to reclaim
it. She caused a temporary châlet to be built for
her occupation at Kern-er-hoët, and, superintending
the works herself, in a few years effected a wonderful
transformation. A model village has been formed,
with church and schools, a well-ordered agricultural
population organised, farm-buildings erected, roads
macadamised, the barren lande drained and reclaimed,
and the château surrounded by a well-wooded park.</p>

<p>Great attention has been paid to the details of the
dairy farm; all the disposable milk is made into
Dutch cheese. The cows are those of Brittany and
Ayrshire; the pigs from England. The whole demesne
comprises about 1300 acres, and the benevolent
Princess resides entirely on the scene of her
labours, among the people whose condition she has
so ameliorated.<note place="foot">The Princess is since dead.</note></p>

<p>From Vannes we made an excursion into the
peninsula of Rhuys, on the south of the Morbihan
Sea. We first stopped at Sarzeau, where Lesage,
the amiable author of 'Gil Blas,' was born, of whom
it was written on his epitaph:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">S'il ne fut pas ami de la fortune,</q></l>
<l><q rend="post">Il fut toujours ami de la vertu.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>Then on to the ducal fortress of Sucinio, situated
<pb n="189"/><anchor id="Pg189"/>
on the borders of the ocean. It is a magnificent
ruin, built in 1250, by Duke Jean le Roux, to
deposit his treasures, in case an invasion of the
French should compel him to leave his duchy.
The position is well chosen, its situation on the seashore
enabling him easily to embark his treasures.</p>

<p>This formidable "coffre fort" was a favourite
residence of the Dukes of Brittany, who came here
as a relief from the cares and ceremonies of a Court.
Its name, of which Sucinio is a corruption, Soucy-ny-ot,
synonymous with the Sans-Souci of the great
Frederick, shows its intention. This locality was
long celebrated for its fine air, and its peaceful character.
Louis XIV. used to say to his courtiers&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Désirez vous un pays de repos et de délices?</q></l>
<l><q rend="post">Allez habiter l'île de Rhuys.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>Partly demolished, Sucinio presents a mass of
now only picturesque ruins, a curious type of the
architecture of the thirteenth century. Five of
the eight enormous battlemented towers remain, and
the flamboyant window of the chapel on the upper
floor of the building is still preserved. Traces of
the portcullis and drawbridge are visible. Over the
gallery is an escutcheon, with a couchant lion
holding the arms of Brittany, between two stags,
also couchant, at the foot of a tree. The sea that
<pb n="190"/><anchor id="Pg190"/>
bathed the walls of the castle has been driven back
by the accumulation of mud and the crumbling of
the walls.</p>

<p>Here was born Arthur III., Comte de Richemont,
Constable of France, and afterwards Duke of Brittany.
This illustrious man, equally great as a
warrior and politician, does not take his merited
place in the page of history, owing probably to the
partiality of French historians, who were always
jealous of the glory of Brittany. Except Du
Guesclin, no other constable has rendered greater
service to France.</p>

<p>A prisoner at Agincourt, where he commanded
the van, he fought with the Maid of Orleans,<note place="foot">
Jeanne had at first a great aversion to Richemont, as he
ridiculed the idea of the army being commanded by a woman.
Dunois effected a reconciliation. Richemont said to the maid&mdash;"Jeanne,
on me dit que vous voulez me combattre. Je ne
sais pas si vous êtes de par Dieu ou non: si vous êtes de par
Dieu, je ne vous crains en rien; si vous êtes de par le Diable,
je vous crains encore moins." It was through her mediation
he became reconciled to the King (1429). Two years afterwards
she was executed.</note> at Beaugeney, took Talbot captive at Patai,
reconquered almost the whole of Normandy, entered
Paris in 1436, and finally expelled the English by
the crushing victory of Formigny, having staked
his honour to drive them out of the kingdom.
<pb n="191"/><anchor id="Pg191"/>
Seven years after, he succeeded to the ducal crown;
but such was the confidence of Charles VII. in his
loyalty, that he retained the supreme command of
the French army with his new dignity. He reigned
only fourteen months. Richmont always caused
two swords to be carried before him when he appeared
in presence of the King; a naked sword, as
Duke of Brittany, and the other sheathed and the
point turned downwards, as Constable of France.
The title of Earl of Richmond, styled by the French
Comte de Richmont, dates from the Conqueror.
Alan Rufus, son of the Earl of Brittany, accompanied
Duke William to England, and commanded
the rear of the army at the battle of Hastings. For
these services, he was rewarded with the hand of the
Conqueror's daughter, and all that northern part
of Yorkshire, now called Richmondshire, where
he built, on the river Swale, the town and castle
of Richmond.  The title passed through Alice,
daughter of Constance of Brittany, to Pierre de
Dreux, and descended through him to all the Dukes
of his house, until John IV., having gone over to
the King of France, was deprived of the earldom by
Act of Parliament, in the reign of King Richard II.;
but Henry IV. again conferred the title upon his
stepson Arthur, afterwards the celebrated Constable
and Duke of Brittany.</p>
<pb n="192"/><anchor id="Pg192"/>

<p>We returned to breakfast at Sarzeau; then on to
the Abbey of St. Gildas de Rhuys, founded on this
inaccessible coast by St. Gildas, an English saint, the
schoolfellow and friend of St. Samson of Dol and St.
Pol de Léon, and which counted among its monks our
Saxon St. Dunstan, who, carried by pirates from his
native isle, settled on the desolate shores of Brittany,
and became, under the name of St. Goustan, the
patron of mariners.</p>

<p>St. Gildas built his abbey on the edge of a high
rocky promontory, the site of an ancient Roman
encampment, called Grand Mont, facing the shore,
where the sea has formed numerous caverns in its
rocks. They are composed chiefly of quartz, and
are covered to a great height with innumerable
small mussels. The tide was too high to admit of
our entering into any of the grottoes, but the piles
of dark rocks beaten into every form by the violence
of the waves, rising sometimes to the height of
sixty feet, are very imposing. St. Gildas, in the
twelfth century, had Abelard for superior, who, on
his appointment, made over to Eloise the celebrated
abbey he had founded at Nogent, near Troyes,
which he called the Paraclete or Comforter, because
he there found comfort and refreshment after his
troubles, but his peace soon ended on his arrival in
Brittany. His gentle nature was unable to contend
<pb n="193"/><anchor id="Pg193"/>
against these coarse, ferocious, unruly, Breton
monks. As he writes in his well-known letter to
Eloise, setting forth his griefs:&mdash;</p>

<p rend="small">
<q>J'habite un pays barbare, dont la langue m'est inconnue et
en horreur: je n'ai de commerce qu'avec des peuples féroces;
mes promenades sont les bords inaccessibles d'une mer agitée;
mes moines n'ont d'autre règle que n'en point avoir. Je
voudrais que vous vissiez ma maison, vous ne la prendriez
jamais pour une abbaye: les portes ne sont ornées que de
pieds de biche, de loups et d'ours, de sangliers, des dépouilles
hideuses des hiboux. J'éprouve chaque jour de nouveaux
périls; je crois à tout moment voir sur ma tête un glaive
suspendu.</q>
</p>

<p>But if Abelard hated the monks, they equally
detested him, and one day tried to poison him, but
he escaped through a gate in the garden wall, still
pointed out, to the sea shore, where his friend and protector,
the Count de Rhuys, awaited him in a boat.</p>

<p>The abbey is now in the occupation of twelve
sisters of the "Charité de St. Louis," who have a
school for poor girls, and, in the summer, take in
families to board who come here for the benefit of
the bracing air of this fine wild coast. There is a
kind of establishment for bathing in the little bay
below the abbey. The board and lodging is moderate,
three francs and a half a day, wine, tea, and
sugar, not included. Boys are admitted up to
thirteen, but the men are sent into the town.</p>

<p>Part of the abbey church is Romanesque: a semi-circular
choir, with three round chapels and the
<pb n="194"/><anchor id="Pg194"/>
transepts. The nave and tower are of modern date.
The pavement is covered with tumulary stones.
Four children of Duke John III. le Roux are buried
here, and one of Joan of Navarre and John IV.
In the Treasury are several pieces of plate, among
which is a Renaissance chalice, with six canopied
statuettes of Apostles forming the knop; and a cross
of the same period, a châsse of St. Gildas, his head
and arm both encased in silver reliquaries.  His
tomb is in the church.  Encrusted in the wall
outside the church are the figures of two knights
on horseback in mailed armour, conical Norman
helmets, long pointed shields, and lances in the
attitude of combat. The church and convent of
St. Gildas belonged to the family of Bisson, whose
self-devotion is commemorated by a statue at
Lorient. He passed here many years of his early
life, and wishing to preserve the buildings from ruin,
gave them as a present to the parish. St. Gildas
is called by the Bretons St. Feltas. There is a rude
coloured print in the church relative to the legend
of Comorre, or Comor, the Breton "Blue Beard," in
which St. Gildas plays a conspicuous part. The
story, as told by Emile Souvestre, is this:&mdash;Guerech,
Count of Vannes, the country of white corn, had a
daughter, Triphyna, whom he tenderly loved. One
day, ambassadors arrived from Comorre, a Prince
of Cornouaille, the country of the black corn, demanding
<pb n="195"/><anchor id="Pg195"/>
her in marriage. Now this caused great
distress, for Comorre was a giant, and one of the
wickedest of men, held in awe by every one for his
cruelty. As a boy, when he went out, his mother
used to ring a bell to warn people of his approach.
He shot a child in order to prove his gun; and,
when unsuccessful in the chase, would set his dogs
on the peasants to tear them in pieces. But most
horrible of all, he had had four wives, who all died
one after the other, under suspicion of having been
killed by either the knife, fire, water, or poison.
The Count of Vannes, therefore, dismissed the
ambassadors, and advanced to meet Comorre, who
was approaching with a powerful army; but St.
Gildas went into her oratory, and begged Triphyna
would save bloodshed, and consent to the marriage.
He gave her a silver ring, which would warn her
of any intended evil, by turning, at the approach of
danger, as black as the crow's wing. The marriage
took place with great rejoicings. The first day six
thousand guests were invited; on the next as many
poor were fed, the bride and the bridegroom serving
at table, a napkin under their arms.  For some
time, all went on well. Comorre's nature seemed
changed, his prisons were empty, his gibbets untenanted;
but Triphyna felt no confidence, and every
day went to pray at the tombs of his four wives.
At this time there was an assembly at Rennes of the
<pb n="196"/><anchor id="Pg196"/>
Breton Princes, which Comorre was obliged to
attend. Before his departure, he gave Triphyna
the keys, desiring her to amuse herself in his absence.
After five months he unexpectedly returned, and
found her occupied in trimming an infant's cap with
gold lace.  On seeing the cap, Comorre turned
pale; and when Triphyna joyfully announced to him
that in two months he would be a father, he drew
back in a rage and rushed out of the apartment.
Triphyna saw that her ring had turned black, which
betokened danger, she knew not why. She descended
into the chapel to pray; when she rose to
depart it was midnight, and she saw the four tombs
of Comorre's wives open slowly, and they all issued
forth in their winding-sheets. Half dead with fear,
Triphyna tried to escape; but the spectres cried,
"Take care, poor lost one! Comorre seeks to kill
you." "I," says the Countess, "what evil have I
done?"&mdash;"You have told him that you will soon
become a mother; and, through the Spirit of Evil,
he knows that his child will kill him, and that is
why he has murdered us, when we told him what
he has just learned from you." "What hope then
of escape remains for me," cried Triphyna."&mdash;"Go
back to your father," answered the phantoms.
"But how escape when Comorre's dog guards the
court?"&mdash;"Give him this poison which killed me,"
said the first wife." "But how can I descend this
<pb n="197"/><anchor id="Pg197"/>
high wall?"&mdash;"By means of this cord which
strangled me," answered the second wife. "But
who will guide me through the dark?"&mdash;"The
fire which burnt me," replied the third wife. "And
how can I make so long a journey?" returned
Triphyna.&mdash;"Take this stick which broke my
skull," rejoined the fourth spectre. Armed with
these weapons, Triphyna sets out, silences the dog,
scales the wall, sees her way through the darkness,
and proceeds on her road to Vannes. On awakening
next morning, Comorre finds his wife fled, and
pursues her on horseback. The poor fugitive, seeing
her ring turn black, turned off the road and hid
herself till night in the cabin of a shepherd, where
was only an old magpie in a cage at the door.
Comorre, who had given up the pursuit, was returning
home that road, when he heard the magpie
trying to imitate her complaints, and calling out
"Poor Triphyna!" he therefore knew his wife had
passed that way, and set his dog on the track.
Meanwhile, Triphyna felt she could proceed no
further, and laid down on the ground, where she
brought into the world a boy of marvellous beauty.
As she clasped him to her arms, she saw over her
head a falcon with a golden collar, which she recognised
as her father's. The bird came to her call,
and giving it the warning ring of St. Gildas, she
told it to fly with it to her father. The bird obeyed
<pb n="198"/><anchor id="Pg198"/>
and flew with it like lightning to Vannes; but,
almost at the same instant, Comorre arrived; having
parted with her warning ring, Triphyna, who had
no notice of his approach, had only time to
conceal her babe in the cavity of a tree, when
Comorre threw himself upon his unhappy wife, and
with one blow severed her head from her body.
When the falcon arrived at Vannes, he found the
King at dinner with St. Gildas; he let the ring fall
into the silver cup of his master, who recognising it,
exclaimed, "My daughter is in danger; saddle the
horses, and let St. Gildas accompany us." Following
the falcon, they soon reached the spot where
Triphyna lay dead. After they had all knelt in
prayer, St. Gildas said to the corpse, "Arise, take
thy head and thy child, and follow us." The dead
body obeyed, the bewildered troop followed; but,
gallop as fast as they could, the headless body was
always in front, carrying the babe in her left hand,
and her pale head in the right. In this manner,
they reached the castle of Comorre. "Count,"
says St. Gildas, "I bring back your wife such as
your wickedness has made her, and thy child such
as Heaven has given it thee. Wilt thou receive
them under thy roof?" Comorre was silent. The
Saint three times repeated the question, but no
voice returned an answer. Then St. Gildas took
the new-born infant from its mother, and placed it
<pb n="199"/><anchor id="Pg199"/>
on the ground. The child marched alone to the
edge of the moat, and picking up a handful of
earth, and throwing it against the castle, exclaimed,
"Let the Trinity execute judgment." At the same
instant the towers shook and fell with a great crash;
the walls yawned open and the castle sunk, burying
Comorre and all his fellow partners in crime. St.
Gildas then replaced Triphyna's head upon her
shoulders, laid his hands upon her, and restored her
to life, to the great joy of her father.&mdash;Such is the
history of Triphyna and Comorre.</p>

<p>On our way back to Vannes we saw on our left
the Butte de Tumiac, or Butte d'Arzon, the largest
tumulus of the Morbihan. It was opened in 1853,
and found to enclose a chamber full of pulverised
bones and various curious objects. From Vannes
we also visited the stately castle of Elven, about four
miles from the station of that name; not built on a
lofty site, for, in the fifteenth century, the barons
had descended from their heights to places more
convenient of access, and where water was more
easily obtained. The Breton feudal lords of Rohan,
Rieux, Clisson, and Penthièvre, no longer required
fortified places as means of defence against the
French and English, but, in consequence of their
own internal divisions, to defend them in their wars
with their duke or among themselves. The castle
of Elven is situated in an insulated coppice wood, in
<pb n="200"/><anchor id="Pg200"/>
the midst of the lande of Elven. It was the chief
place of the lordship of l'Argoët (in Breton, "upon
the wood"), and is also called the fortress of Largoët.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 41. Castle of Elven.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image41.jpg">
    <head>41. Castle of Elven.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>The ruins, which occupy a large enclosure, consist
chiefly of two towers; the principal one, 130 feet
high, is octagonal; the other, which is not above
100 feet in height, is split from top to bottom. The
<pb n="201"/><anchor id="Pg201"/>
battlemented walls are nearly 20 feet thick at the
base. A wide deep moat surrounded the castle, and
it was furnished with subterranean passages and
everything requisite to make it a model of the military
architecture of the fifteenth century. The
donjon has two granite staircases; one leads to the
top, whence may be seen Vannes and the Morbihan,
with its islands. Here, in 1793, the Royalists established
signals. In the castle of Elven, Henry of
Richmond, then only fifteen, with his uncle, Jasper
Tudor, Earl of Pembroke, were detained by Duke
Francis II. for fifteen years. Fugitives after Tewkesbury,
they were thrown by a tempest upon the shores
of Brittany. Henry was claimed both by King
Edward IV. and Louis XI., and was kept by Duke
Francis as a pledge of the good faith of Edward
towards Brittany. Perhaps also Francis may have
entertained some ill-feeling towards Henry from his
bearing the title of Earl of Richmond, which had
been held for more than three hundred years by the
Dukes of Brittany. Francis revived the claim to
the title which Henry VI. had conferred (1452) on
Edward Tudor, father of Henry. Subsequently, on
the assurance of the King of England that he only
required the release of Henry to invest him with the
Order of the Garter and to give him his daughter,
the Princess Elizabeth, in marriage, Duke Francis
made over the Prince to the English Ambassador,
<pb n="202"/><anchor id="Pg202"/>
and he was about to embark at St. Malo for England,
when the Duke's Grand Treasurer (Landais) arrived,
warned Henry of his danger, and helped him to take
refuge in the sanctuary of the church, whence he
afterwards withdrew him again to place him in
honourable captivity for twelve more years, till King
Edward's death. A party being formed in England,
aided by the Duchess of Brittany, Françoise de Foix,
Henry attempted a descent; but the plan being discovered,
after seeing the English coast, Henry was
obliged to return to Brittany and his ships were
scattered in a storm.  Again within his power,
Landais listened to the offers of King Richard III.,
and agreed to give him up; but Henry, informed in
time, left Vannes, threw himself into the forest, and
escaped to France, where he obtained from the regent,
Anne de Beaujeu, the assistance which enabled him
to mount the English throne.</p>

<p>The castle of Elven, with those of Rieux and
Rochefort, belonged to the Maréchal de Rieux.
Elven was rebuilt by him with the materials of the
old; but they were all dismantled by the orders of
the Duchess Anne in 1496, to punish her guardian
for his revolt. Yet Rieux acted as he thought best
for the welfare of his late master and his daughter,
whose cause he defended against the interested views
of the King of France. Rieux had that keen sense
of honour which is one of the characteristics of the
<pb n="203"/><anchor id="Pg203"/>
Breton gentleman. When he reproached Anne de
Beaujeu, regent, to her brother Charles VIII., for
having instigated the King to attack Nantes, contrary
to his engagements, Anne replied, "He had no
written promise." "Et quoi, Madame!" he indignantly
exclaimed; "la parole d'un roy, ne vaut elle
pas mille scellez?" Louis de Rieux, the last of the
race, was shot on the Champs des Martyrs. True
to the motto of his house, "A toute heure, Rieux,"
he showed himself ready "at any hour" to die for
the altar and the throne.</p>

<p>Elven is the scene of M. Octave Feuillet's "Roman
d'un jeune Homme pauvre;" and the keeper who
shows the ruins points out the spot whence the
"Hero of Romance" took the leap to prove his
loyalty, and which gained him the hand of the lady.</p>

<p>Next morning we started early by rail to Questembert,
to meet the diligence for Ploërmel, twenty
miles from this station, passing through Malestroit.
We saw quantities of chestnuts on our road, and
were told they were largely exported to England.
They come principally from the neighbourhood of
Redon and other places in the department of Ile-et-Vilaine,
where they grow as abundantly as described
by Madame de Sevigné, when writing from the
Château des Roches, in the same department:
"Pour nous, ce sont des châtaignes qui font notre
ornement. J'en avois l'autre jour trois au quatre
<pb n="204"/><anchor id="Pg204"/>
paniers autour de moi. J'en fis bouillir, j'en fis rôtir,
j'en mis dans mes poches, on en sert dans les plats,
on marche dessus, c'est la Bretagne dans son triomphe."</p>

<p>Ploërmel derives its name (plo-ermel, land or
territory of Armel) from an anchorite of the sixth
century, who treated a dragon which ravaged the
country in the time of King Childebert in the same
manner as St. Pol de Léon disposed of the monster
at Batz.</p>

<p>The façade of the church of Saint Armel has a
number of grotesque carvings&mdash;the sow playing the
bagpipes, the cobbler sewing up the mouth of his
wife, &amp;c.; but it is principally remarkable for its
eight painted windows of the sixteenth century,
lately restored, and the monumental effigies of two
Dukes of Brittany; the one, John II., who was killed
at Lyons, where he went to settle some differences
with his clergy, on the occasion of the coronation of
Pope Clement V. A wall, loaded with spectators,
fell, and the Duke was crushed in its ruins; the Pope
escaped with being only thrown from his mule.</p>

<p>The other effigy is that of Duke John III., or the
Good, whose death was the signal for the War of
Succession. He died at Caen. These tombs were
formerly in the Carmelite convent founded by
John II., who, on his return from the Holy Land,
established the first Carmelite convent in Brittany,
<pb n="205"/><anchor id="Pg205"/>
and brought monks from Mount Carmel to inhabit
it.</p>

<p>The tombs were destroyed in the Revolution, but
the two statues were saved. They are of white
marble, and are placed on a monumental slab, side
by side, with this inscription: "De tous temps la
fidélité Bretonne rendit hommage à ses souverains."
Duke John II. is represented in a hauberk of mail,
the hood turned back, with cotte d'armes, shield,
and sword. Duke John III. has his head encircled
by the ducal crown, his hair long, his genouillières,
cuissarts, &amp;c., of plate armour. His shield and cotte
d'armes are semé of ermines, and by his side is the
dagger of miséricorde, which served to kill the fallen
enemy unless he cried for mercy. When James II.
passed through Ploërmel after the Battle of the
Boyne, a fugitive and a dethroned monarch, the
Carmelite monks would not take him in; but he
found in the little village of Penfra the hospitality
they had refused him. Here is an establishment,
directed by a brother of Lamennais, the celebrated
author of 'Paroles d'un Croyant,' where people of all
nations&mdash;Indians, negroes from Senegambia, and
others&mdash;are educated and taught trades of every
kind, and sent back to their own countries.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 42. Column of the Thirty.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image42.jpg">
    <head>42. Column of the Thirty.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>The people about Ploërmel and Josselin speak
French instead of Breton, the prevailing language of
the Morbihan department. It is nearly seven miles
<pb n="206"/><anchor id="Pg206"/>
between Ploërmel and Josselin. Equally distant
from each, at Mi-voie, in the centre of a star formed
by avenues of firs and cypresses, is an obelisk set up
to commemorate the famous "Combat des Trente,"
which took place on this spot in 1351, and on which
are inscribed the names of the thirty who fought on
the French side. It was during that period of the
War of Succession when hostilities were carried on
by the two Jeannes, Marshal Beaumanoir, the Breton
<pb n="207"/><anchor id="Pg207"/>
commander of the garrison of Josselin for Jeanne
de Penthièvre, gave a challenge to Bembro', as he
is called, the English captain who held Ploërmel for
Jeanne de Montfort and her infant son, in consequence
of an alleged infraction by the latter of a
truce, agreed upon between the Kings of France
and England, in which it had been stipulated that
the peasants and those not bearing arms should be
unmolested. In spite of this compact, the English
soldiers devastated the country and committed every
kind of excess. Jean de Beaumanoir repaired to
Ploërmel to remonstrate, and it was agreed to settle
the dispute by a fight between thirty warriors from
each camp. The prophecies of Merlin were consulted,
and found to promise victory to the English.
The appointed place of meeting was by a large oak,
the "Chêne de Mi-Voie," on a lande or large plain,
half way from each town. The battle began with
great fury, at first to the disadvantage of the Bretons,
when Bembro' was killed, which threw dismay among
the English; but a German, who succeeded in the
command, rallied their courage, and the melée became
thicker than ever. Beaumanoir was wounded,
and his loss of blood and his long fast produced a
burning thirst, and he asked for water. "Bois ton
sang, Beaumanoir, ta soif se passera," was the reply of
Geoffroy du Bois; and Beaumanoir, forgetting his
thirst and his wound, continued the fight. The
<pb n="208"/><anchor id="Pg208"/>
English kept their ranks close, till Guillaume de
Montauban broke them by a stratagem and threw
them into confusion. He mounted his horse and
pretended to fly, then suddenly turned upon the
English with such force that he threw seven down
and broke their ranks:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Grande fut la bataille et longuement dura:</q></l>
<l>Et le chapple (carnage) horrible est deçà et delà;</l>
<l>La chaleur fut moult grande, chacun si tressua (sua);</l>
<l>De s&oelig;ur et de sang la terre rosoya (rougit).</l>
<l>A ce bon samedi Beaumanoir si jeuna;</l>
<l>Grand soif eut le baron, à boire demanda;</l>
<l>Messire Geoffrey du Bois tantôt répondu a:</l>
<l>'Bois ton sang, Beaumanoir, la soif te passera;</l>
<l>Ce jour aurons honneur, chacun si gagnera</l>
<l>Vaillante renommée, ja blâme ne sera.'&mdash;</l>
<l>Beaumanoir le vaillant adonc s'évertua,</l>
<l>Tel deuil eut et telle ire que la soif lui passa;</l>
<l>Et d'un côté et d'autre le chapple commença:</l>
<l><q rend="post">Morts furent ou blessés, guères n'en échappa.</q>&mdash;<bibl><author rend="smallcaps">Brizeux</author></bibl>.</l>
</lg>

<p>Sir Robert Knollys, Sir Hugh Calverly Croquart,
and others were made prisoners, and thus ended the
Battle of the Thirty; gained, however, in a most disloyal
manner, Montauban getting the aid of a horse,
when all the other combatants fought on foot.</p>

<p>The Breton knights returned to Josselin, their
helmets decorated with branches of the broom&mdash;</p>

<p rend="display"><q>In every basnet a bright broom flower;</q></p>

<p>the place where the battle was fought running,
according to the French poem,</p>

<p rend="display"><q>Le long d'une génetaie qui était verte et belle.</q></p>
<pb n="209"/><anchor id="Pg209"/>

<p>Josselin is celebrated for its château, where died,
1407, Olivier du Clisson, the contemporary and
brother of arms of Du Guesclin, whom he succeeded
in the dignity of Constable of France, which no one
for some time would accept, not thinking themselves
worthy of replacing him. Both differed widely in
position and character. Du Guesclin, though of a
noble family, had not the advantage of fortune like
Clisson, who had immense wealth and landed possessions,
which made him a kind of sovereign in the
duchy. He willed away a million of money. Clisson
was a statesman, Du Guesclin's sole glory was in
arms. Clisson was cruel, intriguing, and insatiable
for riches; Du Guesclin was humane, loyal, and disinterested.
Both were equal in bravery and physical
force: the lance of Du Guesclin and the axe of
Clisson<note place="foot">
<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Olivier du Clisson dans la battelle va</q></l>
<l>Et tenant une martel qu'à ses deux mains porta,</l>
<l><q rend="post">Tout ainsi qu'un boucher abbatit et versa.</q></l>
<l rend="right">MS. <title rend="smallcaps">Chronicles of Bertrand du Guesclin.</title></l>
</lg></note>
carried all before them. Clisson joined
with Du Guesclin in freeing the country from the
"Great Companies," and his most celebrated action
was the defeat of the Flemings at Rosbecq. Few
subjects have been so powerful, or have filled so
important a part, as Olivier du Clisson. He was
true to his sovereign after his reconciliation, and to
<pb n="210"/><anchor id="Pg210"/>
his children after him. John IV. had scarce closed
his eyes when the daughter of Clisson, wife of Jean
de Penthièvre, came to her father and said, "It
depends only on you that my husband receives the
inheritance of Brittany." "How?" asked the Constable.
"By your ridding yourself of the children
of De Montfort." "Ah! cruel and perverse woman,"
exclaimed Clisson; "if you live long, you will destroy
the honour and property of your children;"
and he accompanied his words with such violent
menaces, that, seized with affright, she fled from his
presence, and falling down, broke her thigh. The
prophecy of Clisson was fulfilled, as we shall later
relate. The ancient château in which he died was
destroyed by Henry IV.; the present building was
raised by Alain IX., Vicomte de Rohan, through
Alain VIII., who married Beatrix, eldest daughter of
the Constable, by which Josselin descended to the
Rohans,<note place="foot">
Their name is said to be derived from&mdash;Roh-yan-Rock-John,
from a cadet of the family, who built his fortress on a
rock.</note> a house yielding to none in antiquity
and illustration, being descended from the ancient
sovereigns of Brittany, and allied with all the crowned
heads of Europe,&mdash;"Princes of Bretagne" they were
styled. But the Rohan family became unpopular
in the duchy, when John II. attached himself to
<pb n="211"/><anchor id="Pg211"/>
Louis XI. and France, for the bribe of 8000 livres
to himself and 4000 to his wife.</p>

<p>At the battle of St. Aubin du Cormier, which
sealed the fate of Brittany, the Vicomte du Rohan
betrayed his brother-in-law Duke Francis and the
national cause, and fought on the side of France.
He afterwards marched at the head of the French
troops, and besieged Guingamp, where its brave
defenders declared, "As long as there is a duchess
in Brittany, we will not give up her towns." But
they took Pontrieux and Concarneau, and in 1491
the Vicomte du Rohan was appointed by Charles VIII.
Lieutenant-General in Lower Brittany.  He was
called by his countrymen the "Felon Prince;" and
so detested was he and his race, that it passed into
a proverb to say of a mean, treacherous, dishonest
person, "Il mange à l'auge comme Rohan,"&mdash;"He
eats at the manger (that is, the table of the King of
France) like Rohan." "Un peu de jactance," therefore,
justly observes Daru, in the proud motto of
the Rohans:&mdash;<note place="foot">
This, with "À Plus" and "Plaisance," were the Rohan
mottoes previous to 1789.</note></p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Roi ne puis,</q></l>
<l>Prince ne daigne,</l>
<l><q rend="post">Rohan je suis.</q></l>
</lg>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 43. Château of Josselin.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image43.jpg">
    <head>43. Château of Josselin.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>The château of Josselin stands by a river, on which
side it presents piles of towers and fortifications
<pb n="212"/><anchor id="Pg212"/>
covered with slate, a severe specimen of military
architecture; while on the other side, the cour
d'honneur, we see one of the handsomest châteaux
of the Renaissance yet remaining in Brittany. This
façade is richly ornamented with sculptures of varied
and fanciful design.  Immense gurgoyles, in the
form of serpents, stretching from the roof to the
base, pierced <corr sic="ballustrades">balustrades</corr> or galleries of lace-like
delicacy, in which are introduced, according to the
fashion of the period, the initial letters of the Vicomte
Alain, A and V interlaced. The old Rohan motto,
"À plus," and the escutcheon of gules, nine mascles
or lozenges, occur in every part of this gorgeous
<pb n="213"/><anchor id="Pg213"/>
front, and also on the finely-carved chimneypiece of
the reception room (salle d'honneur). The whole
of the château is in course of restoration by the
Prince de Léon.</p>

<p>In the church of Josselin is the tomb of the Constable
Clisson, with that of Marguerite de Rohan
his wife; both statues were mutilated in the Revolution,
but are now restored: they are of white
marble on a black slab. Clisson is in armour,
Marguerite has her hair plaited and confined in
a network of pearls; she wears a long robe, with a
surcoat above, furred with ermine. The motto,
"Pour ce qu'il me plest (plait)," is in an oratory
which belonged to Clisson, expressing his haughty
and overbearing will. This same motto appears on
his seal, affixed to a letter preserved in the archives
of the empire, and he is recorded to have had it
inscribed upon his Constable's sword, which, like
Du Guesclin, he always wore unsheathed, to show
he was ready at all times to fight the enemies of the
crown.</p>

<p>There hangs in the church a picture of the finding
of the image Notre Dame-du-Roncier, of which
we relate the legend:&mdash;</p>

<p>Long before Josselin was a town, a poor labourer
had remarked, on the spot where now stands the
church of Notre Dame, a bramble bush, which the
frost and snow of the roughest winters never deprived
<pb n="214"/><anchor id="Pg214"/>
of its leaves, but it always remained fresh and green.
Surprised at this strange phenomenon, he dug the
soil under the bramble, and discovered a wooden
statue of the Virgin. A marvellous light played
round the head of the image. The man carried it
home; but next morning, to his surprise, he found
the statue under the same bush whence he had taken
it. The miracle was repeated several times, and
soon attracted crowds of devotees. A chapel was
built to deposit the sacred image, houses followed
next, and a little town gradually formed, which the
Comte de Porhoët surrounded with walls, and Josselin,
his son, endowed with his name, 1030. Such
was the rise of Josselin. A celebrated pilgrimage
still exists to Josselin on Whit Tuesday, resorted to
by crowds of "aboyeuses" or barkers, people possessed
with this kind of epilepsy, said to be hereditary
in several families, and which is accounted for
from the circumstance of a party of washerwomen
having refused a glass of water to the Vierge du
Ronçier, who went to them disguised in the garb of
a beggar. The merciless creatures set their dogs
upon the pretended mendicant, and thus brought
down upon themselves and their posterity this fearful
malediction. The disease is supposed to return
periodically about Whitsuntide, and only to leave
the afflicted when they are carried forcibly to the
sanctuary of Notre Dame to press with their foaming
<pb n="215"/><anchor id="Pg215"/>
lips the fragments still remaining of the ancient
miraculous statue which was burnt upon the public
Place in the time of the French Revolution.</p>

<p>We left Ploërmel at four o'clock in the morning
for Montfort-sur-Mer, passing through Plélan; while
the horses baited at a little auberge we got some hot
coffee, and found a good fire in the kitchen. The
landlady, shut in her "lit clos," did not disturb herself,
but occasionally put out her head to give
directions for our breakfast. On the left of the
road is the forest of Paimpont, which formerly extended
from Montfort to Rostrenan, a kind of neutral
desert land, called Brocéliande, and famous,
under that name, in the history of King Arthur.
It was the theatre of the fairies' most wondrous
enchantments. Here was the fountain of Youth
and also that of Barenton, where they came every
day to draw water in an emerald basin. Here, too,
the enchanted Merlin has lain sleeping for centuries,
enthralled by his pupil the fairy Viviana, who has
cast a spell upon her master she knows not how to
break.</p>

<p>Montfort, where we joined the railway, is celebrated
for the legend of the duck and its ducklings,
and was the residence of the De Montfort family
until Guy Comte de Laval and Sire de Montfort
married Françoise de Dinan, widow of the unfortunate
Gilles de Bretagne, when the Montforts left
<pb n="216"/><anchor id="Pg216"/>
their paternal demesne for the châteaux of Laval,
Vitré, and Châteaubriant.</p>

<p>The railway took us to Rennes, an uninteresting
modern French town, the old town was burnt down
in 1720, and straight streets have risen up, with no
traces of its having been once the ancient capital of
Brittany. Indeed, so French is it altogether, that
the saying runs&mdash;"Bon Breton de Vannes, bon
Français de Rennes." It was here that Constance,
heiress of the duchy, held her court, with Geoffrey
Plantagenet, who, with their unfortunate son Arthur,
were the only Plantagenets, dukes of Brittany. On
the murder of Arthur, his sister Alice carried the
ducal crown to her husband, Pierre de Dreux (called
Mauclerc, from his animosity to the clergy), and
from them descended the dukes of Brittany down to
Queen Anne, whose double marriage conveyed the
duchy to France and the Valois.</p>

<p>When Henry IV. made his solemn entry into
Rennes, the Governor presented him with the three
silver-gilt keys of the city, of rich workmanship;
upon which the King observed, "Elles étaient
belles, mais qu'il aimait mieux les clefs des c&oelig;urs
des habitants."</p>

<p>The following year we made a tour along the
banks of the Loire, and at Angers embarked on
board the steamer for Nantes. The scenery down
the Loire is rich, and the hills covered with vineyards,
<pb n="217"/><anchor id="Pg217"/>
islands planted with willows, and sunny villages,
or occasionally a gloomy fortress comes to
view. Ingrandes is the frontier town, half in Anjou
and half in Brittany, between the modern departments
of Loire Inférieure and Maine-et-Loire.
Lower down is St. Florent (Maine-et-Loire), with
its recollections of the wonderful passage of the
Loire by the Vendean army, so graphically related
by Madame de la Rochejacquelin, and near the
island of Meilleraie, where their brave General Bonchamps
expired, after the fatal engagement of Chollet;
his last act being the saving the lives of four
thousand prisoners shut up in the church, and about
to be executed by the exasperated Vendeans. "Grâce
aux prisonniers" were his dying words. Opposite
St. Florent is Varades, where the Vendeans landed
after crossing the Loire. Only a feeble post opposed
them. Had the republicans lost less time, and sent
a force after their victory at Chollet, much calamity
would have been spared to Brittany, and the Royalists
themselves would have been saved the terrible
defeats of Le Mans and Savenay.</p>

<p>Passing Ancenis, which rises in an amphitheatre
on the vine-clothed hills, and, with its suspension-bridge,
is one of the most picturesque points in the
river, we reached Oudon, with its tall octagonal
tower; on the left, in the department of Maine-et-Loire,
nearly opposite, stands the ruined castle of
<pb n="218"/><anchor id="Pg218"/>
Champtoceaux, where Duke John V. was kept a
prisoner by the implacable enemies of his house, the
Penthièvre family.</p>

<p>Marguerite de Clisson, widow of Jean de Bretagne,
Comte de Penthièvre, lived in retirement in
her stately fortress of Champtoceaux, with her three
sons, Oliver, Count of Blois, and his brothers. Marguerite
inherited the pride, hatred, and cruelty, of her
father, without his chivalrous loyalty and magnanimity.
The kingdom was filled with troubles, and
she thought it a favourable moment for reviving
the pretensions of her family. John V. held his
court at Nantes. She sent Oliver there to assure
the Duke that his mother and brother were ready
to do him homage; and he swore, on his own part,
"de le servir envers et contre tous ceux qui peuvent
vivre et mourir." John, delighted, made the young
man share his bed, and treated him with the greatest
distinction. Oliver expressed his regret that the age
and infirmities of his mother prevented her going to
court, and timidly insinuated the honour she would
feel at a visit from the Duke. The Duke consented,
and, sending off his plate to Champtoceaux,
started with his brother-in-law, Count Oliver, and
his attendants. Having passed the little river which
separates Anjou from Brittany, they saw a man
throwing the planks of the bridge into the water,
and thus preventing the Duke's suite from following.
<pb n="219"/><anchor id="Pg219"/>
At the same time, Charles de Penthièvre, Margaret's
second son, issued suddenly from a wood with an
escort of lances and surrounded the Duke. There
was no kind of indignity they did not make him
suffer. He was tied upon his horse like a criminal,
and conducted first to Clisson, Oliver leading him
with a halter round his neck. The Penthièvres,
who would not let the place be guessed where they
held their captive, conducted him at night, sometimes
on foot, from fortress to fortress, from dungeon
to dungeon; at the same time circulating the
report that they had drowned him in the Loire. As
a last insult, they took him to Champtoceaux, where
Marguerite visited him in prison to exult over his
misfortunes. Meantime the Breton barons, indignant
at the treason of which their Sovereign was the
victim, raised an army for his deliverance, and civil
war broke out with redoubled fury. His heroic
wife, Jeanne de France, showed an untiring energy
to save him. Undaunted by the threats of the
Penthièvres,&mdash;who sent word to her, if she did not
desist from hostilities they would cut her husband
in pieces, nor by the messages from the Duke himself
assuring her that her zeal would cost him his life,&mdash;she
induced her brother, the Dauphin, to order the
Penthièvres not to attempt the life of their prisoner;
she besieged, one after the other, all their castles, and
at last compelled Marguerite to capitulate to save
<pb n="220"/><anchor id="Pg220"/>
her own life. Finding herself and family in a perilous
position, Marguerite agreed that the Duke should
be released (he was at Clisson), and that she and her
sons should retire where they wished, on their promise
to appear at the summons of the Breton nobles.
Immediately on his liberation, Duke John ordered
the destruction of Champtoceaux. A parliament
assembled at Vannes in 1424, condemned Marguerite
and her sons to capital punishment, and
declared all the Penthièvre possessions to be forfeited
to the State. But the culprits had all escaped
the kingdom, except the youngest son, William, a
child only ten years of age, who had been given as
a hostage for the appearance of his mother and
brothers, and was condemned to languish for twenty-seven
years in prison, where he lost his eyesight&mdash;a
victim to crimes in which he had not been an accomplice.
John had made a vow, during his detention,
to give, if he regained his liberty, to the church of
Notre Dame at Nantes, his weight in gold; and
most conscientiously did he perform his promise, for
we read, "He placed himself in his war armour in
the balance, and caused the opposite scale to be
filled with gold till it had attained the weight of the
first; that is to say, three hundred and eighty marks,
seven ounces"&mdash;which sum was delivered over to
the church. Vows of this nature are not unfrequently
recorded. When Don Carlos, the ill-fated
<pb n="221"/><anchor id="Pg221"/>
son of Philip II., lay ill, he vowed to give to the
Virgin, on his recovery, four times his weight in gold
plate, and seven times his weight in silver. The
vow was fulfilled; but the Prince was placed in the
scale in a damask robe and fur coat, and weighed
only seventy-six pounds&mdash;so much was he reduced
by his long illness.</p>

<p>Nantes is a cheerful, busy, handsome city, but
wanting in the picturesque characteristics of the
towns of Lower Brittany. Quimper, Vannes, Rennes,
and Nantes, have all been successively capitals of
the duchy, but Nantes was the usual residence of its
dukes.</p>

<p>The cathedral contains its principal artistic monument,
the tomb of Duke Francis II. and his second
wife, Marguerite de Foix, called "sein de lys," from
the beauty of her complexion. It was erected by
their daughter, the Queen-Duchess Anne, and was
executed by Michel Colomb, a sculptor of St. Pol
de Léon, originally a herd-boy. This monument,
considered a masterpiece of the Renaissance, is not
copied from any Italian original, but is entirely the
offspring of the artist's own fancy. There is much
simplicity in its design and execution. The tomb,
about five feet high, is of white marble, diapered
with ermine and the letter F. On a black slab
repose the effigies of the Duke and Duchess, and
at their feet are lying a lion and a greyhound, holding
<pb n="222"/><anchor id="Pg222"/>
their several escutcheons. Four large allegorical
figures are at each angle of the tomb, representing
the cardinal virtues. Justice carries the book of
the laws, and the sword by which she makes them
respected. This figure is said to be the portrait of
the Duchess Anne. Temperance, in a monastic
dress, is characterised by a bit and a lantern. Prudence,
double faced, holds a mirror and a compass,
and has a serpent at her feet. This figure is in the
costume of a peasant girl of St. Pol; the second
face, that of an old man, is also in the dress of
Lower Brittany. Strength or Fortitude, handsome,
resolute, and calm, strangles a dragon with his
grasp.</p>

<p>Upon the principal sides of the tomb are the
twelve Apostles, and below, in niches, sixteen
mourners (pleureuses) in monastic habits, the faces
and hands white, the rest of the body black. The
beautiful attitude of these figures is much admired.
Some are kneeling, others are seated&mdash;all in the
attitude and expression of prayer. This monument
was originally in the church of the Carmelites,
whence it was transferred to the cathedral.</p>

<p>Besides the remains of Duke Francis and his two
wives, it formerly contained the heart of his daughter,
the Queen-Duchess Anne, enshrined in a golden
case in the form of a heart, surmounted by a crown,
and surrounded by a cordelière; but the tomb was
<pb n="223"/><anchor id="Pg223"/>
rifled during the Reign of Terror. It now holds
the remains of the Constable Duke Arthur III.</p>

<p>Duke John IV. also died at Nantes, after his long
eventful reign, having acquired a military glory
which earned him the name of Conqueror, and
equalled that of Du Guesclin and Clisson. Twice
he lost and twice he regained his crown. He alienated
Du Guesclin and his faithful subjects by his
partiality to England. The Bretons rose, and he
fled to Edward III.; but when Charles V. entered
the duchy, with the intention of confiscating it
to the crown of France, the Bretons all united to
defend their nationality against the ambition of the
French King, and recalled their Sovereign. So great
was the enthusiasm on his arrival at St. Malo, that
the nobles plunged into the water to approach his
ship; and even the widow of his rival, Charles of
Blois, went to welcome him. His cowardly attempt
against the Constable Clisson again compromised
his reputation, and was disgracefully avenged upon
his son by the implacable daughter of Clisson.</p>

<p>The old ducal castle still rises on the left bank of
the river. It was here Anne of Brittany was born,
and here she married, 1499, her old admirer, the
chivalrous Duke of Orleans, then King Louis XII.,
according to her stipulation, that the King, "viendra
l'espouser en sa maison de Nantes." Left at the
age of eleven, by the death of her father, a prey to
<pb n="224"/><anchor id="Pg224"/>
claimants to her hand, which carried with it the
powerful duchy of Brittany, Anne was a prize worth
a king's seeking, even at a time when there were so
many other rich heiresses undisposed of&mdash;Mary of
Burgundy, Elizabeth of York, Isabella of Castille,
and Catherine de Foix. Anne is described as handsome,
but slightly lame, generous, and gentle, but
grave and proud in her demeanour. Louis XII.
called her his "fière Bretonne," and allowed her the
uncontrolled government of Brittany, "tout ainsi
que si elle n'estoit point sa femme."</p>

<p>Though the wife of two Kings of France, Anne
never forgot the interests of her duchy, whose
nationality she always strove to maintain with the
pertinacity of a true Breton, and showed herself, by
her spirit and independence, to be the most worthy
of all her race to wear the ducal crown. Jean
Marot addresses her as "Royne incomparable, deux
fois devinement sacrée, Anne Duchesse de Bretagne."</p>

<p>Like most of the ladies of her age, Anne was an
accomplished linguist. She understood Latin and
Greek, and most of the European languages. She
corresponded with her husband in Latin verse. Her
letters, still extant, breathe the most tender affection.
One, written to him (1499) during the Italian wars,
begins, "Une épouse tendre et chérie écrit à son
époux encore plus chéri, l'objet à la fois de ses regrets
et de son estime, conduit par la gloire loin de sa
<pb n="225"/><anchor id="Pg225"/>
patrie. Amante infortunée, il n'est pour elle aucun
instant sans alarmes. Quel malheur affreux que
celui d'être privé d'un Prince que l'on aime, d'un
Prince plus amant qu'époux."</p>

<p>It was in this castle that Henry IV. signed his
celebrated Edict of Nantes, so fatally revoked by
Louis XIV.</p>

<p>The Duc de Merc&oelig;ur, when governor of Brittany,
made Nantes a regular fortified town. Having
married Marie de Luxembourg, heiress of the house
of Penthièvre, he sought to secure to himself the
duchy of Brittany, while his brother, the Duke de
Guise, aimed at the crown of France. Head of the
League in that province, he looked upon it as a
means of attaining his end: his wife joined him in
his plans of ambition, and they by turns tyrannized
and caressed the Nantais, amusing them with fêtes,
in which the Duchess condescended to dance with
the townsfolk. For twenty years Merc&oelig;ur held the
province; but a peace was eventually signed between
him and Henry IV., through the mediation of
Gabrielle d'Estrées, whose son César de Vendôme,
then four years of age, was affianced to the Duke
de Merc&oelig;ur's daughter, then only six.  When
Henry IV. made his entry into Nantes after the
pacification, he observed, on surveying the fortifications,
"Ventre Saint Gris, les Ducs de Bretagne
n'étaient pas de petits compagnons."</p>
<pb n="226"/><anchor id="Pg226"/>

<p>Nantes has been the scene of many an act of
vengeance on the part of the Kings of France.</p>

<p>The Place du Bouffay, the place of execution,
was the scene of the tragic death of the young
Henri de Talleyrand, Comte de Chalais, executed by
Louis XIII. for his part in the conspiracy which
bears his name. Its object was the death of the
Cardinal, and to place the crown on the head of the
feeble Gaston, who was celebrating his marriage at
Nantes at the time that his victim Chalais was
paying the penalty of his crime.</p>

<p>The restless, intriguing Cardinal de Retz was imprisoned
in Nantes Castle during the minority of
Louis XIV., and made a wonderful escape by letting
himself down from the walls to the river, where a
boat awaited him. It was also at Nantes that the
same monarch caused Fouquet to be arrested, not,
as alleged, for his malpractices in office, but because
his ambition and pomp offended the pride of his
royal master.</p>

<p>For their part in the conspiracy of Cellamare, the
Marquis de Poncallec and three other Breton gentlemen
suffered on the Place du Bouffay, and the
Vendean chief, La Charette, was also there shot
in 1795.</p>

<p>Not far from the castle is the Rue Haute du
Château. At the Maison Juigny, in this street,
the Duchesse de Berri was arrested, after having
<pb n="227"/><anchor id="Pg227"/>
remained sixteen hours concealed in an aperture
behind a chimney on the third floor, scarcely a foot
and a half high and four feet long. The police,
having information of her being in the house,
through the treachery of a Jew, had made a fruitless
search, but had left a watch behind. The soldiers
lighted a fire in the chimney, and the Duchess, with
her three attendants, sallied out, her dress completely
scorched. They had endured the heat, but were
unable to bear the suffocation.</p>

<p>Nantes has some fine promenades and boulevards,
planted with trees. In the Cours Saint Pierre and
St. André are statues of the Duchess Anne and of
the three Breton constables, Du Guesclin, Clisson,
and Richmont.</p>

<p>One of the leading characteristics of Nantes is its
numerous bridges: a regular chain of them form a
continuous line across the river and canals, and others
unite the islands which form the suburbs to the town
itself.</p>

<p>The Museum contains a large collection of pictures,
which the bequest of the Duke de Feltre
(Maréchal Clarke) has increased considerably. These
consist mostly of sketches by Paul Delaroche, and
the charming Italian subjects of Léopold Robert.</p>

<p>"L'enfant charitable"&mdash;a nun on her deathbed
embracing a child who is standing by her side, an
angel behind&mdash;is a touching composition of Ary
<pb n="228"/><anchor id="Pg228"/>
Schäeffer. Another, by Paul Baudry, represents the
death of Marat: Charlotte Corday's open, handsome
face, looks incapable of the crime she has just perpetrated.
There is one by Ziegler&mdash;Daniel in the
lion's den&mdash;an angel staying the lions from molesting
him. The atmosphere of light surrounding the
angel is wonderful and unearthly. These two are
in the general collection, together with numerous
examples of the old masters.</p>

<p>Near our hotel is one of the curiosities of Nantes,
the Passage de la Pommeraye, consisting of three
stories of iron galleries or arcades, uniting the Rue
de Crébillon with the Rue de la Fosse. The second
arcade communicates by a flight of stairs with the
third, called the Galerie de la Fosse, opening upon
the street of that name.</p>

<p>The Garden of Plants is beautifully laid out; groves
and avenues of magnolias in full flower, with rocks,
waterfalls, rustic bridges, all most picturesquely disposed,
making it one of the prettiest gardens and
public promenades in France.</p>

<p>We descended the Loire by steamer, passing by
vast granite buildings, built as magazines for colonial
imports, called Les Salorges, in front of which the
horrible noyades of Carrier took place, and these
warehouses served as a temporary place of confinement
for the victims. We next steamed past the
island of Indret, the great manufacture of steam-engines
<pb n="229"/><anchor id="Pg229"/>
for the State. Here we landed some market
women, in caps of the same form, with high combs,
as those of clear muslin worn by the Nantaises,
only of a coarse material, and edged with black.
On the right was Couëron, where Duke Francis II.
died in consequence of a fall from his horse. The
battle of St. Aubin-du-Cormier had decided his fate
and that of his daughters,&mdash;a humiliation from which
he never recovered. His faithful friend Rieux, who
commanded his army, defeated by the youthful Louis
de la Trémouille; the chivalrous Louis of Orleans, a
prisoner in an iron cage in the "Grosse Tour" at
Bourges; and the safety of his daughters at the mercy
of King Charles VIII., or worse, of his imperious
sister, the Regent Anne de Beaujeu, who would have
committed some act of spoliation, had not the
Chancellor Rochefort saved the duchy by his integrity,
declaring to Anne that "a conqueror without
right is but an illustrious robber."</p>

<p>At Les Pellerins, barges were loading with hay,
and heaps of it standing on the river's edge ready for
embarkation. On the left bank is Paimb&oelig;uf, where
diligences run to Pornic, a favourite little watering-place
south of the Loire.</p>

<p>St. Nazaire is a bustling seaport town, now the
point of departure of the transatlantic steamers for the
West Indies and Mexico. A Mexican, in his picturesque
costume, all the seams of his dress fringed
<pb n="230"/><anchor id="Pg230"/>
with hanging silver buttons, was living in the same
hotel with ourselves. St. Nazaire has now a large
floating basin, opened in 1858, capable of holding
200 ships of large size, and another is in course of
construction.</p>

<p>It was from St. Nazaire that Prince Charles, the
young Pretender, sailed on the adventurous expedition
of '45, furnished with a frigate and a ship of
the line by Mr. Walsh, of Nantes. Among the
noble cavaliers who had sacrificed everything to
follow the Stuarts into exile was the Walsh family,
originally from Ireland. They had shared the wandering
fortunes of Charles II., returned with him at
the Restoration to find the greater part of their
property confiscated; but they did not hesitate to
sacrifice the rest when James II. abdicated the throne,
and a Walsh commanded the ship which carried
the King to France. Sent on a secret mission to
England, he was recognized, denounced, and arrested.
James II. created him an Earl at St. Germain. Two
of his sons had retired to St. Malo and Nantes, and
engaged in commercial speculations, endeavouring
thereby to restore the fortunes of their house. Commerce
was strictly forbidden to the Breton nobles;
but, when war or misfortune had reduced their fortunes,
they were allowed to enter into commerce, or
any other profession, without derogating from their
rank, provided they first deposited their swords with
<pb n="231"/><anchor id="Pg231"/>
the Parliament, to be again claimed when their circumstances
were improved. All will remember the
anecdote in the 'Sentimental Journey.' As a book,
called 'The State of Nobility in Brittany,' published
in 1681, sets forth: "When nobles are engaged in
commerce, their noble blood sleeps; but when the
derogatory works are over, it revives. It is never
lost but in death." But to return to the Walsh
family. One of the brothers had embarked the
remains of his little fortune in the business of "armateur"&mdash;a
kind of shipowner, or one who fits out
and charters ships, and sometimes commands them
himself&mdash;the profession of Jean Bart and Duguay
Trouin.<note place="foot">
The late Vicomte Walsh has written 'Gilles de Bretagne,'
and other novels, with all a Breton's nationality. His son,
the present representative of the family, occupies the beautiful
Château of Chaumont on the Loire, devolved to him by right
of his accomplished wife, the widow of the Comte d'Aramon.</note>
It was to this Anthony Walsh, and a banker
of Dunkirk, that Prince Charles addressed himself to
fit out an old worm-eaten seventy-gun man-of-war, the
'Elizabeth,' they had just obtained from Government
for his expedition. True to the hereditary loyalty
of his family, Mr. Walsh not only devoted all he
possessed to the armament of the frigate, but also
fitted out a brig, called the 'Doutelle'&mdash;both intended
as privateers to cruise against the English&mdash;and
took the command of her himself. On the
<pb n="232"/><anchor id="Pg232"/>
28th June, 1745, furnished with about 4000l. of
money, Charles Edward embarked on the Loire, in
a fisherman's boat, to join the 'Doutelle' at St.
Nazaire, and the 'Elizabeth' at Belle-Isle. He
passed for a young Irish priest, and wore the habit
of a student of the Scots' College at Paris. The
ships encountered an English man-of-war, the 'Lion.'
At the sound of the first shot, the Prince rushed on
deck and asked for a sword. Mr. Walsh, by virtue
of his authority as captain, took him by the arm and
said to him sternly, "M. Abbé, your place is not
here; go below with the passengers." The Prince
obeyed, night separated the combatants, and on the
18th of July he was safely landed in Scotland. On
Michaelmas Day, the following year, the disasters of
Culloden again threw him an exile on the shores
of Brittany.</p>

<p>From St. Nazaire we took a carriage for Guérande,
to visit that remarkable district called the Canton de
Croisic, and consisting chiefly of that place and the
Bourg de Batz. We first came to Escoublac, a
corruption of Episcopi lacus, deriving its name from
a lake belonging to the bishop of the diocese.</p>

<p>The old town has been entirely buried by the
moving sands which have blown over it, and, in
1779, its inhabitants transferred their houses to the
present site. Hills of sand surround it in every
direction.</p>
<pb n="233"/><anchor id="Pg233"/>

<p>Here we left the high road, and turned off to the
left to Poulignan, a little white bay, as its name implies;
a charming retreat, with beautiful white sands
and picturesque rocks. This is a favourite watering-place
with the Nantais. Its whole population appeared
to be in the water. A row of small wooden
châlets are built along the shore for the bathers, no
machines are used.</p>

<p>From Escoublac begins the large extent of salt-pans
in which consist the riches of this country.
They reach to Batz and Le Croisic, the peninsula
which forms this district having formerly been an
island which gradually has been transformed into a
marsh.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 44. Salt-pans, with Le Croisic in the distance.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image44.jpg">
    <head>44. Salt-pans, with Le Croisic in the distance.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>These salt-pans, cut out into small squares, have
the appearance of one great chess-board, interspersed
with occasional hamlets and woods. The
working of them employs the whole population of
the district.</p>

<p>They consist of large basins, dug at different
depths, into which the water of the sea is introduced,
and are divided into squares called "&oelig;illets."
The salt-water is turned upon the marsh by canals
styled "étiers," edged with narrow paths or roads
called "bossis," elevated, some of them, three or four
feet above the marsh; on these the newly collected
salt is generally laid. The water passes by a subterranean
conduit, the "coëf," into the "vasière,"
<pb n="234"/><anchor id="Pg234"/>
where the first evaporation takes place; and then
successively into the "cobiers," "fares," and "adernemètres,"
until it flows finally into the "&oelig;illets,"
where the salt is definitively formed. Each "&oelig;illet"
is about 20 feet by 30.  The heat of the sun
and the wind effect the evaporation, which the
paludier assists by stirring the water from time to
time. The salt which forms on the surface resembles
a kind of white cream, and exhales an
agreeable perfume resembling violets. This is the
finest salt; that which falls to the bottom of the
salt-pan is of a greyish cast. The salt when formed
is then scraped off, drained, and the women collect
it and stack it on the "bossis" into conical heaps,
which they cover with a coating of clay, to render
them impervious to weather. In the salting season,
the salt marshes with their innumerable hillocks of
white salt have the appearance of a vast tent-covered
camp. Each "&oelig;illet" produces about 150 lbs. of
salt. The same salt-pans are worked from century to
century by the same "paludiers" or their descendants.
The proprietors may change, but the workmen
remain, considering the salt-pans their prescriptive
inheritance. For payment, they receive one-fourth of
the salt. The dress of the paludier is a smock-frock
of irreproachable whiteness, with pockets, white shoes,
gaiters, and linen breeches, an enormous black flap
hat turned up on the side in a point or horn. The
<pb n="235"/><anchor id="Pg235"/>
<pb n="236"/><anchor id="Pg236"/>
<pb n="237"/><anchor id="Pg237"/>
young man wears the point over the ear, the married
turns it behind, and the widower in front. We
reached the Bourg de Batz in time for vespers, and
had an opportunity of seeing the people in their
Sunday dress. The men wear three or four cloth
waistcoats, all of different lengths, so as to let the
various colours, red, white, and blue, with which
they are bound, appear one above the other in
tiers, a muslin turnover collar, full plaited breeches
<pb n="238"/><anchor id="Pg238"/>
of fine cloth tied at the knee by garters of floating
ribbon, white woollen stockings with worked clocks
and light yellow shoes, their flap hats ornamented
with a roll of chenille of varied colours. The headdress
of the women is singular and most intricate.
The hair, in two rolls, twisted round with white tape,
forms a kind of coronet across their heads; over
this, a piece of net is drawn tight, forming a sort of
cap, describing a peak behind, and crossing in front
like a handkerchief.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 45. Paludier of the Bourg de Batz, in his working dress.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image45.jpg">
    <head>45. Paludier of the Bourg de Batz, in his working dress.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>The dress consists of several petticoats of cloth
plaited, red body, turned-up sleeves, and large
coloured bibs or plastrons which they call "pièces,"
of the same stuff as their dresses. The girls' aprons
are plain, without pockets, but the women's are of
coloured silk, some of a rich brocade. A shawl
with fringed border completes the costume. Some
of the women had their heads and shoulders wrapped
up in a triangular, black, shaggy sheepskin mantle;
these were widows.</p>

<p>At the inn where we alighted, they keep the splendid
costumes worn by the people at weddings and other
great occasions; and, by paying them for their
trouble, they will put them on for inspection. The
bride's costumes are of great magnificence; they
array themselves in three different dresses on their
wedding-day. First, a gown of white velvet, with
apron of moire antique; secondly, one of violet
<pb n="239"/><anchor id="Pg239"/>
velvet; and the third equally costly. Embroidered
sleeves, the "pièce" of cloth of gold, the petticoats
looped up with a wide sash, embroidered in gold,
and gold clocks to the stockings.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 46. Paludier of the Bourg de Batz, in his wedding dress.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image46.jpg">
    <head>46. Paludier of the Bourg de Batz, in his wedding dress.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>We were shown a state bed, or "lit de mariage,"
a tall four-post, painted red, with green reps tester
and curtains, embroidered with yellow chenille.
The great sign of wealth is to have the bedding
reach to the top of the bedstead.  To effect this,
<pb n="240"/><anchor id="Pg240"/>
the base is formed of bundles of vine-stalks, over
which is spread the straw, and when this scaffolding
has been raised some feet, a paillasse is placed
over it, then the feather-bed, so that it literally
requires a ladder to ascend to the top of this mountain
of bedding, and then it is difficult to crawl
into it. There were a bolster and two pillows
covered with velvet, which, with the sheets, were
all trimmed with a kind of lace or cutwork.</p>

<p>The houses are solidly built of granite, and
slated; the windows large. The furniture is good,
generally comprising a well-waxed carved oak
armoire, upon which are arranged earthenware plates
of various colours.</p>

<p>The paludiers of Batz preserve their original type
distinct from the peasants of the environs; and
form, like the Jews, a separate people, intermarrying
among themselves, retaining their own peculiar
manners and customs. They are supposed to descend
from a Saxon colony. The paludier is tall
in stature; their women remarkable for their fair
complexions, which contrast strongly with their
sunburnt neighbours. They are loyal and devout,
true to their word, courageous and enduring;
though the paludier is miserably poor, from the
oppressiveness of the salt-tax, he never complains.
Begging is unknown. Their food consists of rye
bread, porridge of black corn, potatoes, and shellfish.
<pb n="241"/><anchor id="Pg241"/>
They are sober, and drink wine in small
quantities.</p>

<p>Formerly the salt was distributed over the adjacent
provinces by means of "saulniers," the journeymen
labourers of the paludiers. Dressed in their picturesque
costume, with a train of mules, whose
tinkling bells announced their arrival, the saulnier
was welcomed in every village where he sold his salt
or exchanged it for other merchandize. "Le sucre
des pauvres," as salt has been aptly called, was
severely taxed under the old régime; distributions
of the "sel royale" were yearly made by the Government
among the gentry of the provinces, but the
poor, who had no such privileges, severely felt
the oppression, and smuggling was consequently
extensively carried on, and the "faux saulnier," with
his double bag across his shoulders, secretly sold salt
upon which the gabelle had not been paid. With
a faux saulnier originated the great peasant rising in
Brittany, the Chouan war; a war to which Napoleon
said, "All preceding wars have been but games."
Jean, father of the four brothers Cottereau, was a
maker of wooden shoes, and lived in a forest near
Laval (Maine). From his solitary life he had acquired
such sombre, wild, melancholy habits, that
people gave him the name of Chouan, Maine patois
for Chat-huant, and his family received the sobriquet
long before the insurrection of 1792. Jean
<pb n="242"/><anchor id="Pg242"/>
Cottereau was the most celebrated faux saulnier of
Maine; he had accidentally killed a revenue officer
in one of his encounters, and his heroic mother
made a journey to Versailles, barefooted, "sur le
cuir de ses pieds," to obtain his pardon. Jean's
master and patron was guillotined, his two sisters
shared the same fate, and one of his brothers died
of his wounds, and his body was disinterred by the
Revolutionists. These personal wrongs, the treatment
of the King, the interdiction of the Catholic
religion, its processions, its bells, the persecution of
its ministers, all goaded the Breton peasantry to
revolt; and Jean was the first to fire a gun against a
Republican at the cry of "Vive le Roi." The rising
began with a few peasants, armed with a gun or a
stick, dressed in short breeches open at the knee,
with leather gaiters, and coloured garters; their long
hair streaming over the shoulders, their heads
covered with a wide-brimmed hat, or brown or red
cap, sabots tipped with iron, and, in cold weather, a
loose coat of goatskin. The Chouans assembled in
small bands and attacked the Republicans at night
in ambuscade, and when they had killed a few
"Bleus" disappeared among the corn-fields or the
furze-bushes. Simple peasants, they fought against
the Republicans in defence of the altar and the
throne. Their "commandements" ran thus:&mdash;</p>
<pb n="243"/><anchor id="Pg243"/>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Ton Dieu, ton Roy, tu serviras</q></l>
<l>Jusqu'à la mort fidèlement.</l>
<l>Docile à tes chefs tu seras,</l>
<l>Afin de vaincre surement.</l>
<l>Sobre et discret te montreras,</l>
<l>Buvant peu, parlant rarement;</l>
<l>De ton chef jamais n'agiras</l>
<l>Attendant le commandement;</l>
<l>Violemment rien ne prendras,</l>
<l>Mais en payant exactement.</l>
<l>Age et sexe respecteras,</l>
<l>Etant soldat et non brigand.</l>
<l>Les comités corrigeras,</l>
<l>Et les mouchards chrétiennement;</l>
<l>Né Breton, tu n'oublieras,</l>
<l>Afin d'agir loyalement.</l>
<l>Dans le succès clement seras;</l>
<l>Dans le malheur, ferme et constant.</l>
<l>Chaque jour ton Dieu tu prieras;</l>
<l><q rend="post">Que peux tu sans son bras puissant?</q></l>
</lg>

<p>Such were the first Chouans: they had no organisation
until they followed Larochejaquelin and
the Vendean army to Granville, and accompanied
them in their retreat; when their numbers were
materially increased and their character completely
changed by the deserters and brigands, who joined
and eventually succeeded the peasantry.</p>

<p>The church of Batz is of cut stone. It has a
square tower, surmounted by a cupola steeple,
which with that of Le Croisic serves as a landmark
to vessels having to steer between the two dangerous
rocks Le Four, in front of Le Croisic, and Les
Blanches, situated near the mouth of the Loire.</p>
<pb n="244"/><anchor id="Pg244"/>

<p>The choir is inclined, like that of St. Pol and
others in Brittany. On one of the bosses in the
interior is a grotesque carving of a man torn to
pieces by the seven capital sins. On others are the
Santa Veronica, the Good Shepherd, Ste. Barbara,
&amp;c. Near the church are the pretty ruins of the
chapel of Notre Dame-du-Mûrier.</p>

<p>We drove on to Le Croisic, in Breton, "Little
Cross;" so called from the small chapel of the
Crucifix, built to commemorate the baptism by
St. Felix, Bishop of Nantes, in the sixth century, of
the Saxon colony who occupied the peninsula. Le
Croisic was one of the first towns in Brittany which
received Christianity, and bears for its arms a cross
between four ermines. Along the road-side are
cisterns or wells dug in the sand, and girls were filling
with water the classical stone pitchers they
carried upon their heads&mdash;quite an Eastern picture,
suggestive of Rebecca and the damsels of her
country. Le Croisic is almost surrounded by the
sea, low, and without shelter, which renders it cold,
damp, and exposed to the winds; turf is almost the
only fuel used.</p>

<p>It is much frequented as a watering-place, and
has an Etablissement. It is also a sea-port, with a
rocky entrance to the harbour, and the dangerous
rock with its lighthouse, called Le Four, extending
for a league in front. The inhabitants of Le Croisic
<pb n="245"/><anchor id="Pg245"/>
are principally engaged in the sardine fishery, and
the curing of these fish consumes much of the salt
of the marshes. The people complain this year
they have no large orders for sardines, and there is
but little white salt.</p>

<p>The chapel of St. Goustan, on the edge of the
harbour, is singularly built; its western gable perched
upon a little rock, half of which is inside and half
outside the building. The church is no longer
open for Divine service; but the peasant-girl who
desires to know if she will be married this year, tries
to pass a pin through the bars of the northern window
without touching the wall. On the opposite
side of the estuary are Périac and La Turbale, both
seats of the sardine fishery. Returning the way we
came, we stopped at the Plage Valentin, another
bathing-place in a pretty little bay; with dressing-rooms
and a small Etablissement. An omnibus
conveys the bathers from Le Croisic, for two sous.
The sea looks more inviting here and at Poulignan
than at Le Croisic, where there is so much seaweed
in the harbour. We returned through Batz;
the cathedral tower of Saint Aubin at Guérande is
to be seen at a great distance, and is a prominent
object in the scenery; the whole country is covered
with salt-pans. Guérande stands on a height,
and turning back, the view of the whole district is
most extensive. We passed through Saillé, where
<pb n="246"/><anchor id="Pg246"/>
Duke John IV. married Joan of Navarre, afterwards
the second wife of Henry of Lancaster.</p>

<p>Guérande, built on a vine-covered granite slope,
is a singular old feudal town of the fifteenth century.
It was fortified by Duke John V., and is
nearly surrounded by granite walls, with ten towers
and four old gateways, placed at the cardinal points
of the compass. St. Michel, the principal gate, or
rather a fortress, is flanked by two high towers, and
contains the prison, archives, and hôtel de ville. A
moat formerly surrounded the walls; but it has long
been filled in, and boulevards substituted. From
the battlements hang festoons of honeysuckle and
ivy, and the moat is full of the yellow iris and water-lilies;
nevertheless, Guérande has an austere, sombre
aspect. There is a fine terrace walk, called the
Mail, commanding a view of the whole country
over Poulignan, Batz, and Le Croisic&mdash;a tented
plain of salt.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 47. La Roche Bernard.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image47.jpg">
    <head>47. La Roche Bernard.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>The church of St. Aubin has Romanesque
columns, with grotesque capitals. In one, two
persons are sawing a third, stretched upon a wheel.
On the left of the double-arched porch, is a pulpit
outside the church, and there is some good painted
glass within. Notre Dame Blanche, a chapel of the
fourteenth century, is a pretty little building with
stone pulpit and a sculptured group of Notre Dame-de-la-Salette
with the two peasant children of Alsace.
<pb n="247"/><anchor id="Pg247"/>
Next day, we took a private carriage for La Roche
Bernard; the road lying over a wide extent of land
through Herbignac to La Roche Bernard (Morbihan),
which is most picturesquely situated on a
rocky height overhanging the Vilaine, here traversed
by an elegant suspension-bridge, opened in
1839, about 666 feet long and above 108 feet above
high-water mark&mdash;a terrible dizzy height to cross
even in calm weather. A few years since, the postman,
his cart, and horse were all blown over into
the river, and nothing more was ever heard of them.
<pb n="248"/><anchor id="Pg248"/>
We went fishing several days in a large étang close
to La Roche Bernard, and one evening took a
pretty walk over the hills to another pond situated
in a lovely secluded valley near a water-mill. La
Roche Bernard was an early Protestant colony,
founded by the Sieur d'Andelot, Seigneur of La
Roche Bernard, brother to Admiral Coligny, and
one of the firmest supporters of Calvinism. The
Calvinists used to assemble at his château of Bretesch,
where the minister of La Roche Bernard
came to preach to them. D'Andelot and his sister,
who was equally zealous in the cause, are, it is said,
interred at La Roche Bernard. Near the Halles is
a square block of houses; one of timber, with "Voie
au Duc" inscribed upon it. These houses are said
to have belonged to a Protestant community, and
all to communicate with each other.</p>

<p>The evening of our arrival there was a wedding
supper given at our hotel, the grand dinner having
taken place elsewhere. The bride wore a white sash,
with wreaths of white flowers round her Nantais cap.
After supper the party danced Breton "ronds." The
dancers form a large ring (grand rond), holding
each other's hands, which they swing violently as
they sidle round in a kind of hop-skip-and-a-jump
step, accompanied by singing in a most monotonous
tone. This went on until midnight. This kind of
dance dates, they say, from Celtic times. The music
<pb n="249"/><anchor id="Pg249"/>
consists of the biniou or bagpipe, and the flageolet
or hautboy, sometimes with the addition of a drum.
The biniou, cornemuse, or bagpipe, is the national
instrument of western and southern France. How
it came to be introduced into Scotland and expel
the harp&mdash;which was as much the original music of
Scotland as of Wales and Ireland&mdash;is a mystery. But,
as in the sixteenth century the harp went out and the
bagpipes came into fashion, it may be surmised that
it was brought in, with other French novelties, on the
return of Queen Mary, perhaps by the Queen herself,
or, maybe, some itinerant player of the cornemuse
may have accidentally been in her train, and his
music set a fashion which has now become national.</p>

<p>On market-day numbers of the women from
Muzillac, a place about ten miles distant, came in
with their fruit. They all wear an enormous plaited
black cap, which looks like the cowl of a friar. The
graceful form of the earthenware pots attracted our
attention: probably they came from the adjacent
town of Herbignac. The 15th August, Fête de la
Vierge, and also that of the Emperor, was kept as a
general holiday. An immense concourse of people
arrived from the neighbourhood, and attended the
six o'clock mass. We walked to the quay, to see
the sports on the water; the spectators picturesquely
grouped on a mass of bare rocks, commanding a
pretty view up and down the river.</p>
<pb n="250"/><anchor id="Pg250"/>

<p>The amusements consisted of some races, and a
mât de cocagne, or greased pole, placed horizontally
over the river; the feat being to walk safely to the
end, where the prize was fixed, without falling into
the water. In the evening "ronds" were danced,
and every house had illuminations, in the shape of a
candle stuck in a potato, and placed on each end of
the window sill.</p>

<p>Next day we left by diligence for Vannes, passing
through Muzillac and on to Auray, where we took
the steamer for Belle Isle.</p>

<p>A steamer sails daily from the quay at Auray.
The banks of the River Loch are very picturesque,
the pine-trees (<hi rend="italic">Pinus maritima</hi>) growing to the
water's edge. On the left, the islands of the Morbihan;
on the right, Locmariaker; the view extending
to Carnac and Mont St. Michel, over the
whole sweep of the bay formed by the peninsula of
Quiberon.</p>

<p>At Port Navalo we emerged from the Morbihan,
and, on our right, passed the little rocky island of
Teigneuse, with its lighthouse; and, on the left,
those of Houat and Haedik (the duck and the
duckling); the former famous as the retreat of St.
Gildas, who leaped from here with one bound, a distance
of ten miles, to the peninsula of Rhuys, where
he built his monastery. From Auray to Belle Isle
is in all forty-eight miles&mdash;ten miles of river to Port
<pb n="251"/><anchor id="Pg251"/>
Navalo, the rest open sea. After eight hours' sail
we reached Le Palais, the port and principal town of
Belle Isle, built on the north-east side, and overhung
by the citadel, the work of Vauban. The
town consists of one principal street&mdash;the Rue
Trochu&mdash;so called after the General of that name
and his brother, who were the first, at the beginning
of this century, to introduce agriculture into the
island. We passed, at a distance to the right, the
model farm of M. Trochu fils, on our way across
the island to the lighthouse,&mdash;a cheerless drive, as
there are no trees to be seen except near Le Palais.
When M. Trochu commenced his labours, agriculture
was little attended to in France, but he persevered
in his exertions, beginning by clearing about
sixty acres of granite rock, a land covered with heath
and furze, setting at defiance the Breton saying,
"Lande tu fus, lande tu es, lande tu seras." This
same district is now covered with rich meadows,
fine woods, productive arable fields, and magnificent
pasture land, on which horses are extensively
reared.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 48. Entrance to Le Palais, Belle Isle.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image48.jpg">
    <head>48. Entrance to Le Palais, Belle Isle.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>We gathered on the heathy moor three kinds of
heath, the Cornish among others. The artichoke
grows wild in the waste grounds. Wheat, turnips,
beetroot, Indian corn, and potatoes, are the chief
produce of the land in cultivation. This last vegetable
was introduced by the families from Nova
<pb n="252"/><anchor id="Pg252"/>
Scotia (Acadia), who settled in Belle Isle, after that
province was ceded to England by the Treaty of
Paris, in 1766. This was several years before Parmentier
had extended the use of the potato, or
"truffe rouge," as it was first called, over other parts
of France. Indian corn was probably also brought
in by the Nova Scotians. The leaves are constantly
cut during its growth as fodder for the cattle, so
that the cob hardly attains a foot in height from the
ground. On the left of our road we saw in the distance
the village of Bangor, which gives its name to
one of the four districts into which Belle Isle is
divided. A little south is the fine granite lighthouse,
of the stupendous height of 450 feet. We toiled
up 255 steps (223 stone and 32 iron) before we
gained the lantern, and, though the view was very
extensive, we were rejoiced at finding ourselves safe
down. One of the guardians had been waylaid,
kicked, and beaten, a few evenings before, for some
slight grudge. He seemed in great suffering, but
had no doctor; the Breton, in his simple confiding
faith&mdash;that with the Almighty are the issues of life
and death, and that illness will end according to His
decree&mdash;considers the calling in of a medical adviser
but an unnecessary expense to his family. From
the lighthouse we walked to the sea-shore. Belle
Isle is a table-land, surrounded by steep cliffs,
averaging 130 feet in height, which can only be
<pb n="253"/><anchor id="Pg253"/>
<pb n="254"/><anchor id="Pg254"/>
<pb n="255"/><anchor id="Pg255"/>
descended to the shore in particular places. We
walked to the Grotte du Port Coton, where begins
the "Mer Sauvage," as it is called, an extent of five
to six miles of most picturesque rocks, some elevated
from 130 to 160 feet above the level of the sea,
jagged and torn into most fantastic forms by the
ceaseless dashing of the waters of the Atlantic, which
have formed various grottoes in the cliffs. We
descended into one of these caverns by a narrow
gulley, but could not proceed far, as the tide was
entering fast, and would soon have surrounded us,
cutting off all means of retreat.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 49. Device of Fouquet.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w25" url="images/image49.jpg">
    <head>49. Device of Fouquet.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>It reminded us of the description in the 'Vicomte
de Bragelonne' of the grotto at Locmaria, which was
blown up, and crushed the mousquetaire Porthos,
at the moment of his and Aramis' triumph over the
soldiers of the King. So great at times is the fury
of the waves, that our guide at the lighthouse told
us he had seen on several occasions the spray driven
over to Le Palais, nearly five miles distant. Continuing
our walk along the cliffs, we came to an
enormous mass of rock, standing far out detached
from the cliff, and covered with screaming sea-gulls.
We again descended by another fissure into a pretty
sandy cove, surrounded by the same wild granite
rocks; but in most places there is no beach at all.
It was now high water, so it was useless to attempt
the Grotte des Apothécaires,&mdash;the finest, they say, of
<pb n="256"/><anchor id="Pg256"/>
them all, and we returned to Le Palais well pleased
with the remarkably wild coast we had seen. Belle-isle
forms now a canton in the department of Morbihan.
In ancient days it belonged to the Abbot of
Saint-Croix, at Quimperlé, who sold it, in the time
of Charles IX., to the Maréchal de Gondi, and, in
1573, it was erected into a Marquisate. (Cardinal
de Retz lived here after his escape from the castle
of Nantes.) One of his successors, Henri de Gondi,
being overwhelmed with debt, sold the island to
Nicolas Fouquet, the ill-fated Superintendent of Finance,
on whose disgrace, and his being subsequently
consigned to the fortress of Pignarol, his grandson,
the Marquis de Belle Isle, exchanged it with
Louis XV. for the Comté of Gisors, erected into a
duchy in 1742. Fouquet built a palace and completed
the citadel, for which he employed Vauban.
He also projected fortifications to enclose the town,
which are now in course of completion by the
Emperor, after Vauban's plans. Several guns had
just been landed, the day before we visited the
citadel, to see which an order is requisite. Near
the citadel is the "Maison centrale des détenus," now
only containing a few old men, too feeble for hard
labour. We were too tired to walk to look at the
celebrated cistern of Vauban, which holds, we were
told, above thirty thousand imperial gallons of water.
Fouquet's palace was, it is said, destroyed to complete
<pb n="257"/><anchor id="Pg257"/>
the line of fortifications. A house was pointed
out to us as having formed part of the original
building. Some years since, a stone was picked up
in the harbour bearing his
ambitious device&mdash;a squirrel,
with the motto, <hi rend="italic">Quo non
ascendum?</hi> "To where shall
I not rise?"  The greater
number of the population of
Belle Isle are employed in
the fisheries; of these the
sardine and the tunny are
the chief. There are large
establishments for curing
sardines, which are very abundant, and lobsters,
taken in the rocks of Belle Isle and the little islands
of Houat and Hædic, are sent to London and Paris.
The boats go as far as Spain, to the coast of Catalonia,
for the tunny fishery, which extends from
August to the beginning of October. These fish
are taken by lines hung along the sides of the vessel,
with a bell attached to each to give notice of a
bite. The most esteemed part of the tunny is the
underneath, or "panse." The next morning we
sailed back to Auray. The nearest point to Belle
Isle is Quiberon, only ten miles from Le Palais.
From Auray by rail to Quimper, where we took the
diligence to Pont l'Abbé, an old town formerly of
<pb n="258"/><anchor id="Pg258"/>
some importance, in the midst of a fertile, rich country.
The costume worn at Pont l'Abbé and along
the Bay of Audierne is very singular. The cap, or
"bigouden," is composed of two pieces: first, a kind
of skull-cap, or serre-tête, fitting tight to the head
over the ears, then a little round bit, resembling,
the young people said, a "pork-pie" hat, made of
starched linen, pinched into a three-cornered peak,
the middle peak embroidered and tied on by a piece
<pb n="259"/><anchor id="Pg259"/>
of tape fastening under the chin; the hair is turned
up, "en chignon," over the skull-cap. The body
of the dress has a large "pièce" of red or yellow,
and sleeves to match. The men wear several very
short coats, one over the other, the shortest trimmed
with fringe; sometimes sentences are embroidered
with coloured woollens round the edge. It was
market day; the women were sitting, with distaff
and spindle, on each side of the entrance to the Halle.
Some of them have short bead-chains with a ring,
attached to the left shoulder, to stick their distaffs in
when not at work. There was abundance of fruit
and vegetables, potatoes, and sardines, which, with
bigoudens and other articles of dress, formed the
principal commodities for sale. Pont l'Abbé and its
Port, Loctudy, carry on an extensive trade with
Jersey, and large quantities of potatoes are exported
to that island. There were some Jersey merchants
at the table-d'hôte.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 50. Peasant Girl. Pont l'Abbé.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image50.jpg">
    <head>50. Peasant Girl. Pont l'Abbé.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>The church of Pont l'Abbé has only one aisle.
There is a fine rose window over the west entrance,
of great lightness and richness, with a smaller one at
the left; at the east end is another rose window of
larger dimensions, the mullions forming geometric
patterns, but differing in design from the other. The
French architects always took great pains in the
decoration of this part of the church, and these
wheel windows really rival those of Rouen.</p>
<pb n="260"/><anchor id="Pg260"/>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 51. Apse of the Church, Loctudy.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image51.jpg">
    <head>51. Apse of the Church, Loctudy.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>Attached to the church, are the cloisters of the
Carmelite convent to which the church formerly
belonged, built in the beginning of the fifteenth
century by Bertram de Rosmadec, who had so
much contributed to the completion of the cathedral
at Quimper. The square is surrounded by an interlaced
<pb n="261"/><anchor id="Pg261"/>
circular arcade, forming trefoiled pointed
arches, all in excellent preservation. The access to
the cloisters is through the conventual building,
now a private house and garden, the proprietor
kindly granting us permission.</p>

<p>We drove to Loctudy, on the mouth of the Pont
l'Abbé river opposite the little island of Tudy, called
after an English saint of that name. Fleeing from
the persecutions of the Picts and Scots who desolated
his country, he founded here, at the end of the
fifth century, a considerable monastery, afterwards
destroyed by the Normans.</p>

<p>At Loctudy is a curious Romanesque church, one
of the best preserved in Brittany, which dates from
the Templars of the twelfth century. It has a nave
with aisles going all round the choir, and three round
apsidal chapels at the end. The five arches on each
side of the nave are horse-shoe shaped, and the choir
is surrounded by the same number of high narrow
arches, resting on columns with grotesque capitals of
complicated design. The three chapels behind are
seen through the opening; on one of the capitals
is sculptured the cross of the Templars. The whole
building is spoiled by whitewash.</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Chevaliers en ce monde cy</q></l>
<l>Ne peuvent vivre sans souci;</l>
<l>Ils doivent le peuple defendre,</l>
<l><q rend="post">Et leur sang pour la foi espandre.</q></l>
<l rend="right"><bibl><author rend="smallcaps">Eustache Deschamps</author></bibl>.</l>
</lg>
<pb n="262"/><anchor id="Pg262"/>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 52. Torche of Penmarch.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image52.jpg">
    <head>52. Torche of Penmarch.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>We engaged a rough kind of vehicle, much like
a butcher's cart, to visit the Torche de Penmarch, a
rocky promontory, so called from its fancied resemblance
to a horse's head, forming the southern
extremity of the department of Finistère. The
Torche is a mass of rocks separated from the mainland
by a chasm called the "Saut de Moine," because
<pb n="263"/><anchor id="Pg263"/>
an Irish saint, named Viaud, jumped across it on his
landing. In rough weather, the noise made by the
sea dashing against its sides and rushing through the
crevices of the rocks, is said to be heard at Quimper,
a distance of twenty-one miles. A line of rocks runs
all along the coast, marked by a lighthouse at Penmarch;
we proceeded to another group of rocks
near which M. de Châtellier, a proprietor and antiquary
of this country, has built a house for painting
and enjoying the scenery. One of our party clambered
down to see the "Trou d'Enfer," a tremendously deep
hole in the rocks, the bottom covered with a pink
sort of sea-weed, and the water as clear as crystal.
The whole country is a dreary sandy level, with salt-marshes,
over which we passed to the ruined church
of St. Fiacre, and close by is that of St. Guenolé,
both situated near the sea. The countryman who
showed us the church, knelt reverently down at the
threshold and put up a short prayer before he
entered the sacred building. The general devoutness
and strong faith of the Bretons is most impressive
and genuine, mixed, no doubt, with great superstition;
but, as Wesley says, "Heaven makes
allowance for invincible ignorance, and blesses the
faith notwithstanding the superstition."</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 53. Ship Sculptured on the Walls. Church of St. Guenolé, Penmarch.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w25" url="images/image53.jpg">
    <head>53. Ship Sculptured on the Walls. <lb />Church of St. Guenolé, Penmarch.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>St. Guenolé consists of an unfinished square
tower, with crocketed pinnacles and a porch of considerable
size, under a large mullioned window of the
<pb n="264"/><anchor id="Pg264"/>
fifteenth century. On each side of the porch are
rude sculptures of ships and fishes, not uncommon
in these parts, set there to show the church has been
built with the thank-offerings of the fisher population
of the district. In our
tour we met with several
churches with this sign, evidences
of the piety of the
fishermen; indeed, at Dunkirk,
when the church was
burned down in the sixteenth
century by the
French, it was entirely rebuilt by the contribution
called "le filet saint," from an ancient custom among
the fishermen of having one net so called, the produce
of which was set apart for the church.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 54. Church of St. Guenolé, Penmarch.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image54.jpg">
    <head>54. Church of St. Guenolé, Penmarch.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>Towards the lighthouse are the ruins of the old
town of Penmarch, much celebrated in the maritime
history of the fourteenth to sixteenth centuries; its
commerce extended even to Spain, and the riches of
its inhabitants were so surpassingly great, that they
drank out of silver cups, and the lords of a manor
near the Torche furnished the silk required to line
the road traversed by religious processions, their
wealth being due to the "viande de carême," that is
to say, to the cod fishery. But the discovery of
Newfoundland deprived them of this lucrative
monopoly, and the ravages of Fontenelle le Ligueur
<pb n="265"/><anchor id="Pg265"/>
<pb n="266"/><anchor id="Pg266"/>
<pb n="267"/><anchor id="Pg267"/>
completed their ruin. All now is a scene of desolation.
Penmarch has been called the Palmyra of
Brittany.</p>

<p>Guy Eder Fontenelle, the Leaguer, who spread
terror and devastation throughout Brittany in the
sixteenth century, was a member of the Beaumanoir
family; the name he adopted was that of one of the
family estates. He was born in the Château of
Beaumanoir (near Evran), and his elder brother
early foresaw his guilty career. He escaped from
college and united himself with a set of young men
as lawless as himself; they formed themselves into a
band, which soon became the dread of all Brittany.
They ravaged the whole of Tréguier and Cornouaille,
surprised the châteaux of Coëtfrec and
others, took the church of Carhaix, which they
fortified, and the towns of Paimpol, Lannion, and
Landerneau, which they pillaged, Penmarch and
Pontcroix, whence they carried off an immense
booty and 300 vessels, with which they scoured the
seas; and lastly, Douarnenez and the Island of
Tristan (in 1595), whence fruitless attempts were
made to dislodge them. For three years Fontenelle
made this island his head-quarters, issuing from his
stronghold to devastate the country. He murdered
above fifteen hundred peasants at Plougastel, sank an
English ship, without allowing her crew a moment to
save themselves, imprisoned and tortured at Douarnenez
<pb n="268"/><anchor id="Pg268"/>
all who fell into his hands. His victims never
survived his cruelties more than three or four days,
when their bodies were cast out into the bay to the
fishes. These were only a few of his atrocities. As
he called himself one of the leaders of the League in
Brittany, the Duke de Merc&oelig;ur, its chief, indignant
at the barbarities perpetrated in its name, caused
Fontenelle to be imprisoned, but he was liberated on
paying a ransom; and, fearing he would give Douarnenez
over to the Spaniards, Fontenelle was included
in the pacification of Merc&oelig;ur with Henry IV. But
four years later he was implicated in the conspiracy
of Biron; on which occasion all his old crimes were
raked up against him, and he was condemned to be
dragged on a hurdle, and broken alive upon the
wheel, which sentence was executed on the Place de
Grève at Paris in 1602. In consideration of the
illustrious house to whom he belonged, the king
granted that in the act of condemnation he should
not go by his own name. We next went to see
the church of Saint Nonna in the town, the largest
of the numerous churches in the parish of Penmarch.
Ships are sculptured in front of the tower,
as at St. Guenolé. On the left of the porch is a
pretty window, the mullions formed by three fleur
de lis. In the church is a curious old painting
styled, "Procession du v&oelig;u de Louis XIII." Portraits
of the King, the Dauphin (Louis XIV.),
<pb n="269"/><anchor id="Pg269"/>
Anne of Austria, and Cardinal Richelieu, are introduced,
and a view of the church of St. Nonna is in
the background.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 55. Fleur-de-Lisé Window, Church of St. Nonna, Penmarch.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w25" url="images/image55.jpg">
    <head>55. Fleur-de-Lisé Window, Church of <lb />St. Nonna, Penmarch.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>On our way home we
passed, on the left, at Kerscaven,
two menhirs, one
curiously furrowed and
shaped like a half-opened
fan.</p>

<p>We had a pretty drive
from Pont l'Abbé, with
occasional views of the
Bay of Audierne, extending
from Penmarch to the
Pointe du Raz. Midway the
horse, going down a steep hill, fell, and we all found
ourselves upon the road, but happily unhurt. We
met numbers of peasants returning from the fair at
Pontcroix; and our driver, a butcher by trade, coolly
stopped the vehicle, to discourse with them on the
price of stock, and to handle the sheep they had
bought. Our drive was enlivened with occasional
peeps of the Bay of Audierne till we reached the
little port of that name, the view of which is very
pretty. Audierne is approached by a bridge across
the river or estuary. At its entrance is a lighthouse,
and on the right a sandy bay, with bathing-machines
in the season.</p>
<pb n="270"/><anchor id="Pg270"/>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 56. Pointe du Raz.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image56.jpg">
    <head>56. Pointe du Raz.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>


<p>The town consists of three streets of cut granite
houses, with the name of the builder and the date of
their construction inscribed over the door. Fishing
is the occupation of the inhabitants, and the table-d'hôte
at our comfortable, clean, little inn was plentifully
supplied with magnificent john dorys, large
red mullet, langoustes, and fish of every description.</p>
<pb n="271"/><anchor id="Pg271"/>

<p>From Audierne we took a carriage to visit the
Pointe du Raz, a <corr sic="promonotory">promontory</corr> so famous for its
rocks and wrecks. We went through a treeless
country; near a pretty bay, on the left, is the chapel
of Notre Dame-de-Bon-Voyage, destined chiefly for
sailors, after which the country becomes more wild,
barren, and cheerless. We passed over a bridge which
no Breton would dare to cross at night, for fear of
being flung by the spirits into the river. According
to their belief, a hare appears on the bridge, and
terrifies the horses, who throw their rider, and the
traveller is dragged by the phantom into the muddy
river, where he is kept till morning's dawn, when he
is allowed to pursue his way, exhausted with cold, and
half dead with fright. They are very superstitious
here, as in all Cornouaille. A writer says, "every
nation of the earth has its superstitions and absurdities,
but Brittany has those of all other nations
united." An old woman in a village hard by, said
our driver, has never been seen inside the walls of a
church; the people say she has sold herself to the
evil one, and no one dares go near or speak to her.</p>

<p>On the left is the pretty steeple of the church of
Plogoff, situated on an eminence, and dedicated to
Saint Collédoc, a Welsh bishop of the sixth century,
contemporary of King Arthur, and associated with
many of the doings of Queen Guinevre and the
knights of the Round Table. Lescoff is the last
<pb n="272"/><anchor id="Pg272"/>
village we passed through before&mdash;after driving over
a barren plain&mdash;we arrived at the lighthouse, built
thirty years back at the Pointe.</p>

<p>We walked thence to the Pointe, a gigantic and
magnificent mass of rocks, eighty feet above the level
of the sea. We met with a good-natured woman,
who led the young people over the rocks to look
down the "Enfer de Plogoff." They had a slippery
scramble to reach the hole, a kind of tunnel through
which the sea rushes with great violence, so much
more terrible than that of Penmarch, that the noise
has been compared to the distant roaring of some
thousands of wild beasts issuing from the depths of
a forest. In the mean time, we remained seated on the
bank enjoying the view. On the south lay the Bay
of Audierne, extending in the form of a crescent, the
promontories of Penmarch and Raz forming the
extreme points. The currents, and the numerous
rocks of the bay, render it a dangerous coast, formerly
peopled by barbarous wreckers, who despoiled
the shipwrecked mariners as our Cornish men of old.
Opposite the Raz, about seven miles distant, is the
Island of Sein, and to the right, the Baie des Trépassés.
The island of Sein was anciently the seat of
an oracle, interpreted by nine Druidesses, who were
versed in every art and science. Moreover, they
appear to have been accomplished needlewomen; for
a Breton chronicler, giving an account of the <corr sic="corronation">coronation</corr>
<pb n="273"/><anchor id="Pg273"/>
of an early king (Erech) at Nantes, describes
his mantle as embroidered by these priestesses with
figures of Arithmetic, Astronomy, and Music. Their
skill in divination caused them to be associated with
the fairies; and Morgan&mdash;<hi rend="italic">i.e.</hi> "born of the sea"&mdash;one
of these priestesses, who lived in the first century of
the Christian era, was famous among the British
fairies.</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Avec succès cultivait la magie,</q></l>
<l><q rend="post">Morgan de plus, était assez jolie.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>Chateaubriand celebrates Velleda, the last of the
Druidesses of Sein, tall in stature, her eyes blue, with
long fair floating hair, dressed in a short black tunic,
without sleeves, bearing a golden sickle suspended
from a brazen girdle, and crowned with a branch of
oak. Here King Arthur was brought by Merlin to
recover of his wounds. The inhabitants of the island
were celebrated for their ferocity as wreckers.</p>

<p>The passage between the island and the point
or Bec du Raz&mdash;"qu'aucun n'a passé sans mal ou
sans crainte"&mdash;is very dangerous, owing to the
number of rocks and the violence of the currents;
hence the well-known prayer of the Breton sailor,
"Mon Dieu, secourez-moi pour traverser le Raz,
car mon navire est petit et la mer est grande."
Having no wish to run the risk of being detained
at the island by rough weather, we did not attempt
the passage.</p>
<pb n="274"/><anchor id="Pg274"/>

<p>The Baie des Trépassés, over which we looked on
the right, is so called from the Celtic legend that
the Druids embarked in this bay after their death, to
be buried in the island of Sein:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Autrefois, un esprit venait, d'une voix forte;</q></l>
<l>Appeler chaque nuit un pêcheur sur sa porte;</l>
<l>Arrivé dans la baie, on trouvait un bateau</l>
<l>Si lourd et si chargé de morts qu'il faisait eau,</l>
<l>Et pourtant il fallait, malgré vent et marée,</l>
<l><q rend="post">Les mener jusqu'à Sein, jusqu'à l'île sacrée.</q></l>
<l rend="right"><bibl><author rend="smallcaps">Brizeux</author></bibl>.</l>
</lg>

<p>The bay also derives its name from the numerous
shipwrecks that have taken place on its rocks, and
from the number of corpses that have been floated
there by the currents from ships foundered in the
gulf comprised between the entrance of Brest, the
Ouëssant Islands, and Sein. The whole extent of
the coast of Brittany is one long wall of rocks, placed
as it were to protect it from the inroads of the sea
and from foreign invasion. Heaped one over the
other, they resemble the bastions of a citadel, the
advanced rocks extending out to sea, jutting up in
every direction in endless reefs. Or its line of coast
may be compared to the jagged teeth of a comb,
with a second line of defence in the rocks further
out to sea.</p>

<p>On the desolate shore of the Baie des Trépassés is
a piece of water, the étang de Laoual, site of the city
of Is&mdash;submerged by Divine vengeance, according
<pb n="275"/><anchor id="Pg275"/>
to popular tradition, in the fifth century&mdash;a place of
great commerce, arts, riches, and also of luxury.
Gradlon, or Grallo, the king, alone attempted to
stem the torrent. Built in the vast basin which now
forms the Bay of Douarnenez, it was protected from
the ocean by a strong dyke, the sluices only admitting
sufficient water to supply the town. King Gradlon
kept the silver key (which opened, at the same time,
the great sluice and the city gates) suspended round
his neck. His palace was of marble, cedar, and gold;
in the midst of a brilliant Court sat enthroned his
daughter Dahut, a princess who "had made a crown
of her vices, and had taken for her pages the seven
capital sins." Taking advantage of the sleep of her
father, Dahut one night stole the silver key, and
instead of opening the city gate, by mistake unlocked
the sluices. The King was awakened by
St. Guenolé, who commanded him to flee, as the
torrent was reaching the palace.  He mounted
his horse, taking his worthless daughter behind
him. The torrent was gaining upon him fast,
when a voice from behind called out, "Throw the
demon thou carriest into the sea, if thou dost not
desire to perish." Dahut felt her strength failing
her; the hands that convulsively grasped her father's
waist relaxed their hold; she rolled into the water,
disappeared, and the torrent immediately stopped
its course. The King reached Quimper safe and
<pb n="276"/><anchor id="Pg276"/>
sound, and that town became afterwards the capital
of Cornouaille.</p>

<p>So runs the legend. That a great city once
existed in the Bay of Douarnenez admits of no
doubt. Besides the religious chronicles of the
country, which have preserved the memory of its
existence, in the sixteenth century, remains of old
edifices were standing at the entrance of the bay,
old paved roads have been traced, and walls found
under water near the Pointe du Raz.</p>

<p>The tradition of a town thus swallowed up is
common among the Celtic race. In Wales, the site
of the submerged city is in Cardigan Bay; in Ireland,
in Lough Neagh:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">On Lough Neagh's banks, where the fisherman strays,</q></l>
<l rend="margin-left:8">At the hour of eve's declining,</l>
<l>He sees the round towers of other days</l>
<l rend="margin-left:8"><q rend="post">Beneath the waters shining.</q>&mdash;<bibl><author rend="smallcaps">Moore</author></bibl>.</l>
</lg>

<p>One of our party went out fishing to the Pointe,
and returned well laden with his spoils.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 57. Front of the Church, Pontcroix.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image57.jpg">
    <head>57. Front of the Church, Pontcroix.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>The road from Audierne to Douarnenez passes by
Pontcroix, a little town on the same river (Goazien)
as Audierne, along which the road runs&mdash;a charming
drive. It has a magnificent Romanesque church of
the twelfth (probably of the fifteenth) century, with
a remarkable porch, richly embroidered in quatrefoils
and trefoils. A tower in the centre, with octagonal
spire is second to none in Cornouaille, except that
<pb n="277"/><anchor id="Pg277"/>
<pb n="278"/><anchor id="Pg278"/>
<pb n="279"/><anchor id="Pg279"/>
of Quimper. The arches of the nave are horseshoe,
the transepts very narrow. Under the altar of the
Lady Chapel is a "Cène," half the size of nature,
sculptured in ivory and marble, of marvellous workmanship.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 58. Wheel of Sacring Bells, Notre Dame de-Comfort, near Douarnenez.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w25" url="images/image58.jpg">
    <head>58. Wheel of Sacring Bells, Notre Dame <lb />de-Comfort, near Douarnenez.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>Eleven miles from Douarnenez we stopped to see
the pretty little chapel of Notre Dame-de-Comfort,
in a hamlet of that name, with light open-work
steeple. Attached to one of the arches, on the left
of the choir, is a wooden wheel, hung round with
bells, to which is attached
a long string.
It is erroneously
called "the wheel of
fortune;" but is, in
fact, the old wheel of
sacring bells in use
before the single
bell was adopted. The boy who showed us the
chapel pulled the string which was fastened to a
hook near the altar, and the wheel revolved and rang
a merry peal. Formerly there was a little wooden
figure attached to the wheel, which performed the
same office. The road runs round a hill, along an
estuary formed by the river, and suddenly the beautiful
lake, called the Bay of Douarnenez, bursts on
the sight, of a blue as lovely as the Italian seas.</p>

<p>The dirty little town of Douarnenez is charmingly
<pb n="280"/><anchor id="Pg280"/>
situated to the south of the bay, the hills clothed
with trees to the water's edge. The Pointe du Raz
forms the western boundary of the bay, and it is shut
in to the north by the peninsula of Crozon; its extreme
point, Pointe de la Chèvre, advancing nearly
midway into the bay. The tide here falls eighteen
feet. The triple peaks of the Méné-Hom, one of
the Montagnes Noires, is a prominent feature in the
view. Islands are scattered over the gulf, and the
island of Tristan, retreat of Fontenelle le Ligueur,
is so close to Douarnenez, that it may be reached on
foot at low water.</p>

<p>The hotel was crammed, gentlemen sleeping on
the billiard-table, or littered down in the room of
the table-d'hôte: the place was crowded. All the
world had flocked in to assist at the Pardon of Sainte
Anne-la-Palue, which was to take place the following
morning. No vehicle was to be had, and we were
in despair of being able to go, when a good-natured
voyageur kindly offered to drive us in his carriage&mdash;a
proposal we thankfully accepted. In all our wanderings
we had hitherto never been so fortunate as
to see a Pardon, and we were very anxious to go.</p>

<p>The Pardon of Sainte Anne-la-Palue takes place
the last Sunday in August, continuing three days,
and is one of the most frequented in Finistère.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 59. Costume of a Finistère Bride.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image59.jpg">
    <head>59. Costume of a Finistère Bride.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>At Plonevez-Porzun we turned off the Crozon
road, and about two miles further arrived at the
<pb n="281"/><anchor id="Pg281"/>
chapel. The road all the way was lined with peasants
walking to the Pardon. The young men of Douarnenez
wear blue jackets, embroidered in colours,
with rows of plated buttons, the sleeves and waistcoat
of a darker blue than the jacket, scarlet sashes, some
with plaited bragou bras and shining leather gaiters;
but most of them wore trowsers, their hair long, and
their hats with two or three rows of coloured variegated
<pb n="282"/><anchor id="Pg282"/>
chenille. The women had square caps, and
aprons with bibs. Those who were in mourning
wore light yellow caps, called "bourladins," stained
that colour with beeswax or saffron.</p>

<p>St. Anne is a newly-built church, standing on the
slope of a down which separates it from the sea, in a
perfectly insulated situation. It is only opened once
a year for the Pardon. Round it were erected
numerous stalls, with toys, epinglettes, and rosaries
(chapelets), in heaps for sale; for rosaries must always
be purchased at the Pardon, to preserve the wearer
from thunder and hydrophobia. The great fabric
for them is at Angers, where they are made in
immense quantities. In the principal manufactory
a steam-engine is used for turning the beads; in the
others the common lathe. One maker told us she
sent annually into Brittany alone rosaries to the
value of 800<hi rend="italic">l</hi>. There were tents and booths erected
for the accommodation of the pilgrims who had
arrived the preceding day. They eat, drink, and
dance in the tents by day, and sleep on the tables at
night.</p>

<p>At ten o'clock, at the ringing of a bell, a procession
was formed, consisting of a long line of peasants,
preceded by priests and banners, which made the
round of the church; the penitents, en chemise to
the waist, barefooted, carrying wax-tapers in their
hands. The penance is sometimes executed by
<pb n="283"/><anchor id="Pg283"/>
proxy: a rich sinner may, for a small sum, get his
penance performed by another. One woman made
the round of the church on her knees, telling her
beads as she hobbled along. This was in performance
of a vow made for some special deliverance.</p>

<p>We proceeded to the top of the hill, from which
the beautiful Bay of Douarnenez presented a most
lively appearance; fleets of small boats arriving from
every direction, and a huge steamer from Brest,
which was obliged to land its passengers in small
boats, on account of the shallowness of the water.</p>

<p>The appearance of the downs now became very
animated, covered with gaily-dressed peasants arranged
in groups, sitting or lying on the grass, in
every kind of attitude.</p>

<p>At four o'clock the grand procession took place.
First came the priests of all the surrounding districts,
with the banners and crosses of their parishes; then
followed five girls (three and two) in white, carrying
a banner, and eight more in similar attire, bearing a
statue of the Virgin. Next appeared the banner of
Sainte Anne, carried by women in the gorgeous costume
of the commune&mdash;gowns of cherry-coloured
silk, trimmed half the way up with gold lace, a silver
lace scarf, and aprons of gold tissue or rich silk
brocade. Under their lace caps was a cap of gold
or silver tissue. Four more of these superbly-dressed
bearers ("porteuses") carried the statue of Ste. Anne.</p>
<pb n="284"/><anchor id="Pg284"/>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 60. Well of Ste. Anne-la-Palue.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image60.jpg">
    <head>60. Well of Ste. Anne-la-Palue.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>Girls carrying blue flags walked by their side. Troops
of barefooted penitents and shaggy-headed beggars
closed the procession, which was followed by a countless
train of the peasants. It slowly wound its way
over the hill, and again descended to the church,
<pb n="285"/><anchor id="Pg285"/>
where it mingled among the crowds of assembled
spectators, which filled the churchyard and were
seated on the steps of the calvary.</p>

<p>Not far from the church is the holy well of Ste.
Anne, where devotees were engaged pouring the
holy water over their hands and backs, dipping their
children, and testing its miraculous efficacy by various
other ablutions.</p>

<p>We proceeded next morning to Quimper, having
had no opportunity of seeing Douarnenez itself. In
the season it is a favourite watering-place, the bathing
being about two miles from the town. It is a great
place for the sardine fishery. From Quimper we
went by rail to Rosporden, whence an omnibus runs
to Concarneau. The church of Rosporden is situated
on a little promontory, jutting out into a large étang
fed by the river Aven, which runs through it and
flows on to Pontaven.</p>

<p>We took a carriage at Rosporden for Le Faouët,
passing by Scaër on the Isole, a stream which rises
at the foot of the Montagnes Noires, takes a curve
round the town of Scaër, and joins the Laita. It is
full of trout and salmon.</p>

<p>Scaër is a town remarkable for having preserved
many old customs and superstitions; among others,
the bees are considered to be entitled to share in the
joys and sorrows of the family. Their hives are surrounded
with a red stuff on the occasion of a marriage;
<pb n="286"/><anchor id="Pg286"/>
with a black on that of a death. This custom
is still preserved in Wales. In all parts of Brittany
bees are treated with special affection. As the redbreast
is sacred, because she broke a thorn from the
crown of our Lord that pierced His brow, so are the
bees revered because, as we learn from the code of
Hoel the Good, though they were sent from heaven
to earth after the fall of man, the blessing of Heaven
has ever followed them in their exile. This, too, is
the reason the wax they produce has the privilege of
lighting the altars for the divine office.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 61. Cross Stones.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w25" url="images/image61.jpg">
    <head>61. Cross Stones.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>It was the day of a Pardon, and the peasants were
all in gala dresses. A wrestling match unfortunately
had just been finished; for throughout Cornouaille
wrestling has been, from time immemorial, as favourite
a game as in our county of the same name.
Our driver tried without success to procure for us
some of the little double crystals, intersecting each
other at right angles,
called "pierre de croix"&mdash;by
mineralogists grenatite&mdash;found
in the Coatdry,
a small affluent of
the Aven, washed out of the mica slaty rocks in
which they abound. The peasants assign to them
a miraculous origin, and wear them in little bags
round the neck as charms against headache, blindness,
shipwreck, and hydrophobia, being, as they
<pb n="287"/><anchor id="Pg287"/>
allege, signed with the cross. According to tradition,
a pagan chief, having, in his impious rage,
thrown down the cross in the chapel of Coatdry,
Heaven, in memorial of the outrage, placed the sacred
symbol upon the stones of the river.</p>

<p>At Le Faouët we again entered the department of
the Morbihan. This pretty little town is situated
between the Sterlaer and the Ellé. We first walked
to see the chapel of Ste. Barbe, perched, in the most
singular manner, in the cleft of a high rock, about a
mile from the town.</p>

<p>After a steep climb we reached the plateau of the
hill, where is the monument of a M. Berenger, who
desired to be buried in this elevated spot, which
commands a charming view of the surrounding
country, the silvery waters of the Ellé winding at the
base of the mountain. We then descended, by a
flight of handsome, broad, granite steps, with balustrades,
to the chapel, placed on so narrow a space
that it was impossible to give it the usual inclination
to the east. The entrance-porch is to the southwest,
and the high altar opposite, against the walls
of the chapel, to the north-east. On the top of the
steps is the belfry, consisting of a roof, supported by
four columns. The day of the Pardon each pilgrim
rings the bell. The chapel was built in this singular
spot, according to tradition, by a knight, who was
overtaken by a storm in the valley of the Ellé beneath.
<pb n="288"/><anchor id="Pg288"/>
He saw an enormous mass of detached rock on the
point of falling down and crushing him, when he
invoked the intercession of Sainte Barbe, the guardian
saint against thunder, promising to build her a chapel,
if delivered from the danger. His prayer was heard;
the rock was stayed in its descent and rested on the
cleft, where, next day, the grateful knight began
building the chapel, as a thank-offering for his
escape. Above Ste. Barbe, stationed on an insulated
rock, one of the highest peaks in Brittany, is a small
chapel, dedicated to St. Michael, also approached by
a flight of stone steps, like Ste. Barbe, with bridge
built over an archway. The rock on which it stands
is so abrupt, that rings are placed along the sides of the
chapel for the pilgrims, when creeping round, to hold
on by. Many have perished in the attempt; none,
they say, have ever succeeded in making the circuit.</p>

<p>There was a wedding at Le Faouët during our stay
there. Guests, invited from all quarters, to the
number of 250, arrived in their gala costumes, some
of them magnificent: one woman wore a gown
entirely of gold tissue; it was her wedding-dress.
The musicians, with biniou and hautboy, went round
to summon the guests. We saw the procession
going to church. The bride was prettily dressed,
with a high cap, beautifully "got up," pointed in
form, and trimmed with lace, and embroidered; a
muslin apron, also lace-trimmed, and a double muslin
<pb n="289"/><anchor id="Pg289"/>
shawl, similarly trimmed, the lace beautifully plaited;
a violet silk dress, white moire sash, and a small
bunch of white flowers. The bridegroom was "en
bourgeois." Outside the church door were tables,
laid out with cakes; after the service the bride and
all the party took each a cake and put money in the
plates, as an offering for the poor. They next
adjourned to the Place, where they danced three
"gavottes" under the trees. The ceremony of
stealing away the bride then took place; that is, she
was chased by some dozen of the youths of the company,
and he who had the good fortune to capture
her she treated to a cup of coffee at a café. Dinner
followed, and then they returned to the interminable
gavotte. They hold each other's hands "en grand
rond," then wind themselves round the centre couple,
executing most elaborate steps, and uncoil again to
return to the grand rond. We counted as many as
thirty couples in one gavotte. These festivities last
two, or sometimes three, days, during which time all
the wedding party are entertained free of expense.</p>

<p>Le Faouët is a great fishing quarter. The Ellé,
which flows round the town, is a stream of considerable
size; and, four miles below Le Faouët, it is
joined by the Laita, and before Quimperlé unites
its waters with the Isole, whence its mingled streams
flow into the Atlantic, under the name of the Laita.
We were told that large fish were taken in a pond
<pb n="290"/><anchor id="Pg290"/>
in the grounds of the Abbey of Langonnet, not far
from Le Faouët, but it is strictly preserved.</p>

<p>The people of this district retain all the old
Breton superstitions; they believe in the Car of
Death, drawn by six black horses, driven by the
"Ankou," or Phantom of Death, with an iron whip.
They also have full faith in the Washerwomen of
the Night (Lavandières de la Nuit), who wash the
shrouds for the dead, and fill the air with their
melodious songs:&mdash;</p>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Si chrétien ne vient nous sauver,</q></l>
<l>Jusqu'au jugement faut laver:</l>
<l>Au clair de la lune, au bruit du vent,</l>
<l><q rend="post">Sous la neige, le linceul blanc.</q></l>
</lg><lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">If no good soul our hands will stay,</q></l>
<l>We must toil on till judgment-day:</l>
<l>In strong wind or clear moonlight,</l>
<l><q rend="post">We must wash the death-shroud white.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>They engage the passer-by to help them in wringing
the linen; if he refuses, they drown him in their
washing trough, or suffocate him in a wet sheet.
Should he show himself ill-disposed, after having
agreed to help them, they dislocate his arm. If he
wrings the wrong way, his fate is inevitable; but if
docile and obliging, they give him some clothes and
dismiss him.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 62. Rood-Screen or Jubé, St Fiacre.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image62.jpg">
    <head>62. Rood-Screen or Jubé, St Fiacre.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>A mile and a half from Le Faouët, on a height
a little off the Quimperlé road, is the beautiful
<pb n="291"/><anchor id="Pg291"/>
<pb n="292"/><anchor id="Pg292"/>
<pb n="293"/><anchor id="Pg293"/>
church of Saint Fiacre, dating from the middle of
the fifteenth century, celebrated for its carved
wooden jubé, or rood-screen, and its painted glass.
The church is falling to decay. It would be tedious
to enumerate all the figures, and describe the details
of this beautiful jubé. The carving is a perfect
tracery of lace-work. Three large figures represent
our Saviour and the two thieves. Then there are
the Virgin and St. Joseph; the latter, with carpenter's
plane and hammer. Below, Adam and Eve,
and the Angel with the flaming sword. Two angels
hold cartouches, on one of which is inscribed, "L'an
mil C/IIII XX/IIII (1480) fut fait cette sculpture par Olivier
de Loergan;" and, on the other, "Cette passion fut
peinte l'an 1627. Yves Perez fabricant. Tous repaint
en 1866." Below are panels carved in the flamboyant
style, of exquisite workmanship. The two
middle panels have the sacred monogram, those on
the east side ermines surrounded by cordelières.</p>

<p>The side of the rood-loft facing the choir has
pendents with grotesque carvings of allegorical signification.</p>

<p>A man in an apple-tree, gathering the fruit,
symbolizes theft. Next comes a disgusting representation
of gluttony: a man relieving himself of a
pig he has swallowed, the tail alone remaining in
his mouth. Then follow a young man and woman,
gaily attired, emblematic of luxury. So far, three
<pb n="294"/><anchor id="Pg294"/>
of the "sept péchés capitaux" are represented; but
after these comes a national subject: a man playing
on the bagpipe. The figures throughout the rood-screen
are all boldly executed, and the tracery most
elegant and delicate.</p>

<p>The painted glass in the church is considerable,
and represents the Life of Our Saviour, that of St.
Fiacre, the Feast of Herod, and the Martyrdom of
the Baptist, figures of the Prophets of the Old
Testament, with many others. In most of the subjects,
the figures are much mutilated. On one
window is inscribed, "Pierre Androuet ouvrier demeurant
à Kemperlé 1552." Over one altar is a
sculpture, representing the Martyrdom of Saint
Sebastian, between two archers, in the quaint costume
of the sixteenth century.</p>

<p>About six miles from Le Faouët, is the ruined
castle of Poncallec, with its forest, étang, and forge;
once the demesne of the young marquis of that
name, who was implicated in that conspiracy to
transfer the Regency from the Duke of Orleans to
Philip V. of Spain, called the plot of Cellamare. Of
the hundred and forty-eight gentlemen included in
the accusation, all escaped to Spain, except Poncallec
and three others. Poncallec refused to
accompany them from a superstitious fear, a fortune-teller
having foretold he should perish by the
sea, "par la mer." They took refuge in a church,
<pb n="295"/><anchor id="Pg295"/>
but were surprised by a party of cavaliers who had
muffled the feet of their horses to reach them unheard.
They escaped through a subterranean passage,
and, for fifteen days, lay concealed in the
hollow of a yew-tree, fed in secret by faithful
peasants. Poncallec traversed France in the disguise
of a priest, but was arrested at the Pyrenees.
He with the three others were all convicted of high
treason, and, a few hours after their condemnation,
were beheaded at Nantes. Poncallec was the last to
suffer. When ascending the scaffold, he asked the
executioner his name; on his answering "La Mer,"
Poncallec felt the witch's prophecy was fulfilled.</p>

<p>The estates of the four victims were confiscated,
their arms effaced from the fronts of their houses,
the moats of their castles filled in, and their trees
(hautes futaies) cut down, "à hauteur d'infamie,"
that is, within nine feet of the ground, in like
manner as were those of Moor Park, after the
execution of the Duke of Monmouth. A list was
presented to the Regent Philip of other offenders,
but he tore the paper, and published an amnesty.
The story of Poncallec is dramatically told by
Alexandre Dumas, in his novel, called 'Une fille du
Regent.' The Bretons honoured the victims as
martyrs, and M. de la Villemarqué, in his 'Chansons
Bretons,' gives a touching elegy which shows the
sympathy excited by the tragic fate of Poncallec:</p>
<pb n="296"/><anchor id="Pg296"/>

<lg rend="display">
<l><q rend="pre">Quand il arriva à Nantes, il fut jugé et condamné,</q></l>
<l rend="margin-left:4">Condamné non par ses pairs,</l>
<l>Mais par des gens tombés de derrière les carrosses.</l>
<l rend="margin-left:6">Ils demandèrent à Poncallec:</l>
<l rend="margin-left:6">'Seigneur marquis, qu'avez vous fait?</l>
<l rend="margin-left:6">&mdash;Mon devoir; faites notre métier.'</l>
<l>Il est mort, chers pauvres, celui qui vous nourissait,</l>
<l>Qui vous vêtissait, qui vous soutenait;</l>
<l>Il est mort celui qui vous aimait, habitants de Berné</l>
<l>Celui qui aimait son pays et qui l'a aimé jusqu'à mourir.</l>
<l rend="margin-left:8">Il est mort à vingt-deux ans</l>
<l rend="margin-left:2">Comme meurent les martyrs et les saints;</l>
<l rend="margin-left:8">Que dieu ait pitié de son âme!</l>
<l rend="margin-left:2">Le seigneur est mort &hellip; Ma voix s'éteint, &hellip;</l>
<l rend="margin-left:2">Toi qui l'as trahi, sois maudit, sois maudit;</l>
<l rend="margin-left:8"><q rend="post">Toi qui l'as trahi, sois maudit.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>We left Le Faouët and its comfortable primitive
inn, the "Lion d'Or," with much regret; the
country around is beautiful, and we had arranged
to set out early that we might cross the Montagnes
Noires by daylight; but we were disappointed in
procuring a carriage, and it was not till late in the
afternoon that we were able to leave in a diligence,
of which the coupé alone was reserved to us, the
interior being occupied by Breton farmers, returning
from a horse-fair. From the elevated wooded
ground of Le Faouët, the road makes a precipitous
descent, and crosses the little stream of Moulin-au-duc,
after which it again rises, in a winding direction,
along the side of a mountain with a valley
and little stream beneath. Then a rapid descent
<pb n="297"/><anchor id="Pg297"/>
brought us to Gourin, where we would gladly have
risked staying the night, and waited till morning to
pursue our road over the mountains, but we had
paid our fare to Carhaix. Up hill and down again,
like all the roads in mountainous Finistère, from
Gourin we ascended again and passed a crest of the
Montagnes Noires, which separates the three departments
of Finistère, Morbihan, and Côtes-du-Nord;
and proceeded through a valley to Carhaix,
where we arrived at midnight, and therefore had no
opportunity of seeing the beauties of the mountain
scenery.</p>

<p>Carhaix is a dirty, unpaved, dull town of the
middle ages, much decayed from its ancient importance
when capital of the country dismembered
from Cornouaille, in the sixth century, by Comorre
the Breton Bluebeard. It is situated on an eminence,
commanding an extensive view of the barren
monotonous surrounding country, bounded by the
Arré mountains, the Alps of Finistère. It is
the centre of Lower Brittany, and the Duke
d'Aiguillon, Minister of Louis XV., caused six
roads to be made from it to Brest, Quimper,
Morlaix, St. Brieux, Vannes, and Châteaulin, with
the hope of introducing commerce and civilisation
into this barren district, "le dernier trou du monde,"
as it is styled by the Parisian.</p>

<p>La Tour d'Auvergne, Premier Grenadier de
<pb n="298"/><anchor id="Pg298"/>
France, was born here, and a bronze statue of
him, by Marochetti, has been erected to his memory.
He is in the uniform of a private soldier,
and presses to his heart the sword of honour just
presented to him by the First Consul. Round the
pedestal are four bas-reliefs, representing scenes in
his life. In the first, he saves a wounded soldier;
in the second, he forces the gates of Chambery;
in the third, he takes leave of the parents of a youth,
for whom he goes as a substitute into the army.
The last represents his death; he was killed by a
lance at Ober-hausen (Bavaria), fighting against the
Austrians. The monument bears this inscription
on its four sides:&mdash;</p>

<p rend="small"><q rend="pre">La Tour d'Auvergne, 1^er Grenadier de France, né à Carhaix
le 23 Decembre, 1715; mort au champ d'honneur le 27
Juin, 1800.</q></p>

<p rend="small"><q rend="pre">Ecrivain, Citoyen, Soldat, sa vie toujours glorieusement
remplie ne laisse que de sublimes exemples à la posterité.</q></p>

<p rend="small"><q rend="pre">Tant de talens, et de vertus, appartenaient à l'histoire et
au premier Consul, de les devancer.</q></p>

<p rend="small"><q>Celui qui meurt dans une lutte sacrée trouve pour le repos
une patrie même sur la terre etrangère.</q></p>

<p>Preferring the title of "Premier Grenadier de
France" to higher honours, La Tour d'Auvergne
remained as a private soldier to his death; but in
a decree of Buonaparte, then First Consul, preserved
in the Musée des Archives, he orders that
La Tour d'Auvergne's name should still be kept on
<pb n="299"/><anchor id="Pg299"/>
the muster-roll of his old regiment; and, when called,
the corporal should answer, "Mort au champ
d'honneur!"</p>

<p>The moderation and absence of ambition in the
character of La Tour d'Auvergne is expressed in a
letter to Le Coq, Bishop of Ille-et-Vilaine. He
writes,&mdash;"Je me prosterne bien plus volontiers devant
la Providence pour le remercier que pour rien
demander; du pain, du lait, la liberté; et une c&oelig;ur
qui ne puisse jamais s'ouvrir à l'ambition, voilà
l'objet de tous mes désirs."</p>

<p>La Tour d'Auvergne had a learned dog, which
he educated as a soldier; he went through the
whole drill, and his master made him always wear
boots. He marched in them, on one occasion, the
whole distance from Paris to Guingamp.</p>

<p>A horse fair and market were going on at Carhaix.
Some of the women wore curious flannel
hoods, edged with colours. There were baskets of
burnt limpet shells and lime, used in washing as
substitutes for soap. In the porch of the church
dedicated to St. Tremeur (son of the Bluebeard
Comorre) are some of the little skull-boxes so
common in the north of Brittany. One was labelled,
"Ci gît le chef de Mr. Thomas François Nonet,
ancien notaire et maire de la ville de Carhaix le 28
J^ier 1776, décédée le 8 7^bre 1842." The curfew bell
rings at Carhaix at a quarter to ten.</p>
<pb n="300"/><anchor id="Pg300"/>

<p>We left next day for Huelgoat, fifteen miles distant,
the road up and down, wild and dreary. At
Pont Pierre, about nine miles from Carhaix, we
crossed the Aulne, even here a considerable river,
with a beautiful thick forest on our right. At a
place called La Grande Halte, we turned off the
road to the right for Huelgoat, about a mile and a
half off. It is prettily situated on a large pond or
lake, nearly a mile and a half in circumference, and
of great depth (20 feet). It was market day; the
men wore brown serge coats, close white breeches
and black gaiters, with straw hats bound with black.
The countrymen from Saint Herbot were there in
their black shaggy goat or sheepskin overcoats, the
hair turned outwards (there are flocks of black sheep
throughout Finistère), without sleeves, and the white
breeches, black gaiters, and straw hats. The women
of Huelgoat wear large white turnover collars and
caps with long ends turned up.</p>

<p>We first walked to the rocking stone on the slope
of a steep hill, considered the third largest in Brittany;
the block forming a kind of double cube,
that is, about twice the length of its height. It
requires a very slight impulse to make it rock. This
"fairy stone" is often consulted by the peasants. In
the ravine close by, below the path, is what is called
the "Cuisine de Madame Marie," but termed in the
guide-books the "Ménage de la Vierge;" a recess
<pb n="301"/><anchor id="Pg301"/>
formed of large masses of fantastically shaped granite
rocks, through which a small stream of water flows,
arriving thither from the pond, by a subterranean
course. One stone, hollowed out, is called the
écuelle of the Virgin, and others have each the
name of some different utensil requisite for the
"Ménage" of our Lady. The young people managed
to scramble to the bottom.</p>

<p>Huelgoat (Breton, "high wood") is celebrated for
its lead-mines, which are now no longer worked. A
well-kept path, cut on the top of the ridge, leads to
the mines, about two miles and a half distant, along
a neat little canal, three feet wide, issuing from the
great pond, and supplying the hydraulic machine
used to pump the water out of the mine. The
deeply wooded valley, along the ridge of which it
runs, is traversed by a rushing stream, which runs
over rocks; and at a place called Le Gouffre, the
rounded granite masses are piled in the wildest confusion,
like those of the Ménage de la Vierge, forming
a large dark cavern, at the bottom of which the
imprisoned river foams and roars, and has forced
itself an escape through a gorge at some distance
from the place, where it is lost to view. A young
girl is said, about a century back, to have fallen
down this gulf. Attempting to gather some of the
mosses that line the sides of the rocks, she slipped in
and perished in the sight of her intended. Her body
<pb n="302"/><anchor id="Pg302"/>
never reappeared, but our guide assured us that her
ghost was seen four years since, and that sighs and
groans are to be heard at eve issuing from the fatal
chasm.</p>

<p>The pretty little ivy-leaved campanula was growing
here in abundance. We visited in succession
the "robber's cave," the "Pierre cintré" (a natural
archway), and other wonders, and returned much
pleased with the infinite variety of fantastic rocks,
rushing waters, and hanging woods, which form this
charming scene.</p>

<p>The lead-mines of Huelgoat have been worked
since the fifteenth century for the silver which the
lead-ore (galena) contains.</p>

<p>The right of working these mines and those of
Poullaouen was given by Louis XIII. to Jean du
Châtelet, Baron of Beausoleil, and his wife. He
was at that time General of the Mines in Hungary,
and inspector of the French mines. They were
accompanied by German miners, but their mysterious
researches caused them to be accused of sorcery
and magic. Richelieu had them imprisoned in the
Bastille, where they both died, victims of the fanaticism
of the age, and the works were abandoned till
the eighteenth century. They are now no longer in
operation, but it is said are about to be re-opened.</p>

<p>Retracing our steps to La Grande Halte, on the
Carhaix road, we turned off to the left to see the cascade
<pb n="303"/><anchor id="Pg303"/>
of St. Herbot. We left our carriage, and
walked up a hill covered with underwood, opposite
the fall. The cascade is formed by the little river
Elez falling through a mountain gorge about 650
feet <del>in</del> in length, filled with granite rocks of every
shape and size, the sides overhung with woods of
oak. The height of the fall is 230 feet.</p>

<p>There was no water in the cascade. At the best,
it must be only a succession of small falls. The
river tumbles from rock to rock, forming on some
of the ledges pools of water, filled with small trout,
some of which were caught by our party.</p>

<p>According to the legend, a giant of the country,
wishing to clear the fields of his friend, a Druid,
from the rocks that encumbered them, rolled them
down the torrent.</p>

<p>We descended the hill to the road where we had
left our carriage, and went to the chapel of St.
Herbot, a building of the sixteenth century, on the
side of a rushing brook. It has a high square tower
opening into the church, and a rood-screen of wood
beautifully carved in the style of the Renaissance,
which forms three sides round the altar. Two angels
are represented with cups, the "sainte graal" receiving
the blood of Christ. The entrance to the
church is up a flight of steps. It has a beautifully
sculptured south porch, with statues of the Apostles,
and some fine painted-glass windows. One part of
<pb n="304"/><anchor id="Pg304"/>
the church has the windows with iron bars, as if for
defence.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 63. Carved Stalls, St. Herbot.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image63.jpg">
    <head>63. Carved Stalls, St. Herbot.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>Near the altar is the tomb of the anchorite, St.
Herbot; his effigy reposes under a Gothic canopy,
upon a granite sarcophagus, represented in his hermit's
gown, the hood thrown back, flowing hair, long
beard, his breviary suspended to his girdle, and his
pilgrim's staff by his left arm. His feet repose on a
recumbent lion. St. Herbot is the great patron of
cattle; the three days of the fair and pardon all the
bullocks rest; and when an animal is ill, an offering
of his hair is made to the saint. We saw a heap of
horsehair and cows' tails lying on one of the altars.
<pb n="305"/><anchor id="Pg305"/>
<pb n="306"/><anchor id="Pg306"/>
<pb n="307"/><anchor id="Pg307"/>
These are annually sold for the profit of the
church, and the proceeds amount to a considerable
sum. Our guide gravely assured us that on the
first of May, day of the Pardon of St. Herbot, the
cows "d'elles mêmes" walk three times round the
church.</p>

<pgIf output="txt">
  <then><p>[Illustration: 64. Carved Stalls, St. Herbot.]</p></then>
  <else>
    <p><figure rend="w100" url="images/image64.jpg">
    <head>64. Carved Stalls, St. Herbot.</head>
    <figDesc></figDesc>
    </figure></p>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<p>We returned late to Carhaix, and left next day
for Guingamp, passing, about two miles out of the
town, through the village of St. Catherine on the
Hierre, where the church has fleur-de-lisé windows,
like that of Penmarch. We here entered the department
of the Côtes-du-Nord through Callac, where we
changed horses; the country was hilly and wooded.
On the left we saw the spire of the church of Notre
Dame-de-Grâces, where repose the remains of Charles
of Blois; on the right appeared the cathedral towers
of Guingamp. At this last place we took the rail
to Caulnes-Dinan, and on, by diligence, to Dinan,
whence we proposed returning by St. Malo; but,
finding the time of the boat's sailing did not suit
our arrangements, we returned by Paris and Dieppe
to London.</p>
<pb n="308"/><anchor id="Pg308"/>
</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="309"/><anchor id="Pg309"/>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head rend="hsmallcaps">Some Useful Dates in the History of Brittany.</head>
<lg rend="indent">
<l>1320. Du Guesclin born.</l>
<l>1338. Marriage of Charles of Blois and Jeanne de Penthièvre.  Du Guesclin at the tournament.</l>
<l>1341. Death of John III. Beginning of the War of Succession.</l>
<l>1342. John de Montfort, prisoner in the Louvre, 1345. Escape to England and death.</l>
<l>1346. Siege of Hennebont defended by Jeanne de Flandre.</l>
<l>1347. Charles of Blois taken prisoner at La Roche Derrien.</l>
<l>  "   War of the two Jeannes.</l>
<l>1351. Combat of the Thirty.</l>
<l>1356. Charles of Blois liberated.</l>
<l>1359. Siege of Dinan.</l>
<l>1364. Battle of Auray.</l>
<l>1365. Treaty of Guérande.</l>
<l>1370. Du Guesclin, Constable of France.</l>
<l>1375. John IV. flees to England.</l>
<l>1380. He is recalled.</l>
<l>1387. Death of Du Guesclin.</l>
<l>1387. Clisson marries his daughter to Jean de Penthièvre.</l>
<l>1407. Death of Clisson.</l>
<l>1420. Seizure of John V. by the Penthièvres.</l>
<l>1488. Battle of St. Aubin du Cormier.</l>
</lg>
</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="310"/><anchor id="Pg310"/>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
    <head rend="hsmallcaps">Chronological Table of the Dukes of Brittany.</head>

    <p>
    <figure rend="w100" url="images/table.png">
    <figDesc></figDesc></figure>
    </p>
    <pgIf output="txt">
    <then>
    <eg>
1. GEOFFROY II.                        CONSTANCE
3rd son of Henry II.,--------=--------Heiress of Britanny
    1175                     |
                          Arthur,
                           1196.

CONSTANCE,------------=-----------2. GUY DE THOUARS
Heiress of            |
Brittany.           Alix,
                    1213------=-----Pierre de Dreux.
                              |
                       John II., 1286.
                Beatrix, daughter of Henry III.
                              |
                              |
1. Maria,-------------=------Arthur II., 1305----------------------------------=-----2. Jeanne de Montfort.
Vicountess            |                                                        |
de Limoges            |                                                        |
                      |                                         +--------------+--------+
          +-----------+----------+                              |                       |
          |                      |                 Jean Comte de Montfort + 1345.    Beatrix.
Jean III. (Bon), 1313.   Gui Comte de Penthièvre.........Jeanne de Flandre........Gui de Laval.
Isabelle de Valois.              |                              |                       |
                                 |                              |                Beatrix de Laval
                          Jeanne la Boiteuse.        Jean IV. (Vaillant), 1366.         |
                        Charles de Blois + 1364 ....... 1. Mary of England.      Richard de Bretagne.
                                 |                       2. Joan Holland.........Marguerite d'Orleans.
          +----------------------+--------------+       3. Joan of Navarre.             |
          |                      |              |               |                       |
Jean Comte de Penthièvre.       Gui.           Henri.           |                       |
Marguerite de Clisson.     Died in captivity.                   |                       |
          |                                       +-------------+-----+           Francis II., 1458
   +------+-------+                               |                   |
   |      |       |                         John V., 1439     Arthur III., 1457...1. Marguerite de Bretagne.
Olivier Charles Guillaume ................ Jeanne de France      Constable.       2. Marguerite de Foix.
                                                  |                                     |
        +----------------------+------------------+--------+                            |
Francis I., 1442.         Pierre II.,          Maria.     Gilles.                  Anne, 1488.
1. Yolande d'Anjou.       1450.                         Francoise de Dinan.......1. Charles VIII.
2. Isabeau d'Ecosse.     Francoise d'Amboise.                                    2. Louis XIII.
                                                                                        |
                                                                                   +----+----+
                                                                                 Claude.   Renée.
</eg>
</then>
</pgIf>
</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="311"/><anchor id="Pg311"/>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head rend="hsmallcaps">Index.</head>
<pb n="312"/><anchor id="Pg312"/>
<lg><lg>
<l>Abelard, <ref target="Pg192">192</ref>.</l>
<l>Ancenis, <ref target="Pg217">217</ref>.</l>
<l>Angoulême, Duke and Duchess, <ref target="Pg167">167</ref>.</l>
<l>Anne, of Austria, Queen, <ref target="Pg122">122</ref>, <ref target="Pg269">269</ref>.</l>
<l>Anne de Beaujeu, Regent, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref>, <ref target="Pg229">229</ref>.</l>
<l>Anne of Brittany, Queen-Duchess, <ref target="Pg042">42</ref>, <ref target="Pg050">50</ref>, <ref target="Pg062">62</ref>, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref>, <ref target="Pg153">153</ref>, <ref target="Pg221">221</ref>, <ref target="Pg222">222</ref>, <ref target="Pg223">223</ref>.</l>
<l>Arré, mountains, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref>, <ref target="Pg297">297</ref>.</l>
<l>Arthur and Geoffroy Plantagenet, <ref target="Pg216">216</ref>.</l>
<l>Arthur III., Duke of Brittany, Constable of France, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref>.</l>
<l>Artois, Comte d', <ref target="Pg029">29</ref>.</l>
<l>Auray, <ref target="Pg157">157</ref>.</l>
<l>Auray, battle of, <ref target="Pg161">161</ref>.</l>
<l>Auray, Ste. Anne d', <ref target="Pg158">158</ref>.</l>
<l>Avranches, <ref target="Pg023">23</ref>.</l>
<l>Audierne, <ref target="Pg269">269</ref>.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l>Baciocchi, Princess, <ref target="Pg187">187</ref>.</l>
<l>Baie des Trépassés, <ref target="Pg274">274</ref>.</l>
<l>Barbès, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref>.</l>
<l>Barkers (aboyeurs), <ref target="Pg214">214</ref>.</l>
<l>Bas-Foins, <ref target="Pg049">49</ref>.</l>
<l>Beaumanoir Chapel, <ref target="Pg056">56</ref>.</l>
<l>Beaumanoir, Jean de, <ref target="Pg052">52</ref>, <ref target="Pg206">206</ref>.</l>
<l>Beauport, Abbey of, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref>.</l>
<l>Belle-Isle-en-Mer, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref>.</l>
<l>Bellière, Château of, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref>.</l>
<l>Berri, Duchess, <ref target="Pg226">226</ref>.</l>
<l>Bertheaume, Island, <ref target="Pg128">128</ref>.</l>
<l>Bigouden, <ref target="Pg258">258</ref>.</l>
<l>Biniou, <ref target="Pg249">249</ref>.</l>
<l>Bisson, <ref target="Pg155">155</ref>, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref>.</l>
<l>Blanche of Castille, <ref target="Pg149">149</ref>.</l>
<l>Blue Beard, Breton, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref>.</l>
<l>Boisgelin, Château, <ref target="Pg075">75</ref>.</l>
<l>Bonchamps, <ref target="Pg237">237</ref>.</l>
<l>Bourg-de-Batz, <ref target="Pg217">217</ref>.</l>
<pb n="313"/><anchor id="Pg313"/>
<l>Brest, <ref target="Pg118">118</ref>.</l>
<l>Bretesch, Château of, <ref target="Pg248">248</ref>.</l>
<l>Breton bed, <ref target="Pg239">239</ref>;</l>
<l>&mdash; butter, <ref target="Pg153">153</ref>;</l>
<l>&mdash; character, <ref target="Pg099">99</ref>;</l>
<l>&mdash; chestnuts, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref>;</l>
<l>&mdash; cow and pig, <ref target="Pg153">153</ref>;</l>
<l>&mdash; distaffs, <ref target="Pg259">259</ref>;</l>
<l>&mdash; farmhouse, <ref target="Pg086">86</ref>;</l>
<l>&mdash; knitting, <ref target="Pg074">74</ref>;</l>
<l>&mdash; soup, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref>;</l>
<l>&mdash; threshing, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref>;</l>
<l>&mdash; vehicles, <ref target="Pg037">37</ref>.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l>Cancale, <ref target="Pg039">39</ref>.</l>
<l>Carnac, <ref target="Pg177">177</ref>.</l>
<l>Cesson, Tour de, <ref target="Pg071">71</ref>.</l>
<l>Carhaix, <ref target="Pg297">297</ref>.</l>
<l>Chalais, Comte de, <ref target="Pg226">226</ref>.</l>
<l>Champ des Martyrs, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref>.</l>
<l>Champtoceaux, Château de, <ref target="Pg218">218</ref>.</l>
<l>Chandos, Sir John, <ref target="Pg016">16</ref>, <ref target="Pg046">46</ref>, <ref target="Pg089">89</ref>, <ref target="Pg162">162</ref>.</l>
<l>Châteaubriand, <ref target="Pg036">36</ref>, <ref target="Pg041">41</ref>.</l>
<l>Châteaulin, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref>.</l>
<l>Chatelet, J. du, <ref target="Pg302">302</ref>.</l>
<l>Chêne-Ferron, Château of, <ref target="Pg057">57</ref>.</l>
<l>Cherbourg, <ref target="Pg001">1</ref>.</l>
<l>Charles the Bad, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref>.</l>
<l>Charles of Blois, <ref target="Pg067">67</ref>, <ref target="Pg075">75</ref>, <ref target="Pg082">82</ref>, <ref target="Pg161">161</ref>.</l>
<l>Charles V., <ref target="Pg223">223</ref>.</l>
<l>Charles VI., <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>.</l>
<l>Charles VII., <ref target="Pg047">47</ref>, <ref target="Pg191">191</ref>.</l>
<l>Charles VIII., <ref target="Pg203">203</ref>, <ref target="Pg229">229</ref>.</l>
<l>Clisson, Constable, <ref target="Pg025">25</ref>, <ref target="Pg089">89</ref>, <ref target="Pg186">186</ref>, <ref target="Pg209">209</ref>.</l>
<l>Clisson, Marguerite, <ref target="Pg089">89</ref>, <ref target="Pg218">218</ref>.</l>
<l>Colomb, Michel, <ref target="Pg127">127</ref>, <ref target="Pg221">221</ref>.</l>
<l>Combat des Trente, <ref target="Pg206">206</ref>.</l>
<l>Combourg, Château de, <ref target="Pg036">36</ref>.</l>
<l>Comorre, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref>, <ref target="Pg297">297</ref>.</l>
<l>Concarneau, <ref target="Pg142">142</ref>.</l>
<l>Conquet, Le, <ref target="Pg128">128</ref>.</l>
<l>Constance of Brittany, <ref target="Pg216">216</ref>.</l>
<l>Cornouaille, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref>.</l>
<l>Costume, <ref target="Pg023">23</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref>, <ref target="Pg140">140</ref>, <ref target="Pg234">234</ref>, <ref target="Pg249">249</ref>, <ref target="Pg258">258</ref>, <ref target="Pg283">283</ref>, <ref target="Pg288">288</ref>, <ref target="Pg298">298</ref>.</l>
<l>Couëron, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref>.</l>
<pb n="314"/><anchor id="Pg314"/>
<l>Couësnon, <ref target="Pg029">29</ref>.</l>
<l>Courcorro, <ref target="Pg181">181</ref>.</l>
<l>Coutances, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref>.</l>
<l>Crêpes, <ref target="Pg011">11</ref>, <ref target="Pg169">169</ref>.</l>
<l>Croisic, Le, <ref target="Pg232">232</ref>.</l>
<l>Crosses, <ref target="Pg104">104</ref>.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l>D'Andelot, Sieur, <ref target="Pg248">248</ref>.</l>
<l>Dinan, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref>, <ref target="Pg050">50</ref>.</l>
<l>Dinan, Françoise de, <hi rend="italic">see</hi> Françoise.</l>
<l>Dinan, Roland de, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref>.</l>
<l>Dinard, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref>.</l>
<l>Dogs of St. Malo, <ref target="Pg042">42</ref>.</l>
<l>Dol, <ref target="Pg030">30</ref>.</l>
<l>Douarnenez, <ref target="Pg276">276</ref>, <ref target="Pg279">279</ref>.</l>
<l>Dubourg, <ref target="Pg029">29</ref>.</l>
<l>Du Guesclin, <ref target="Pg024">24</ref>, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref>, <ref target="Pg045">45</ref>, <ref target="Pg051">51</ref>, <ref target="Pg053">53</ref>, <ref target="Pg074">74</ref>, <ref target="Pg143">143</ref>, <ref target="Pg162">162</ref>, <ref target="Pg209">209</ref>.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l>Elven, Château of, <ref target="Pg199">199</ref>.</l>
<l>Edward III., <ref target="Pg015">15</ref>, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref>, <ref target="Pg153">153</ref>, <ref target="Pg223">223</ref>.</l>
<l>Edward IV., <ref target="Pg201">201</ref>.</l>
<l>Escoublac, <ref target="Pg232">232</ref>.</l>
<l>Estouteville, Sieur d', <ref target="Pg013">13</ref>, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref>.</l>
<l>Epinglettes, <ref target="Pg160">160</ref>.</l>
<l>Ermine, Order of, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref>.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l>Filet, saint, <ref target="Pg264">264</ref>.</l>
<l>Faouët, Le, <ref target="Pg287">287</ref>.</l>
<l>Folgoët, Le, <ref target="Pg120">120</ref>.</l>
<l>Fouquet, N., <ref target="Pg256">256</ref>.</l>
<l>Francis I., Duke of Brittany, <ref target="Pg047">47</ref>, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref> <hi rend="italic">note</hi>, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>.</l>
<l>Francis II., Duke of Brittany, <ref target="Pg221">221</ref>, <ref target="Pg229">229</ref>.</l>
<l>Françoise de Dinan, <ref target="Pg046">46</ref>, <ref target="Pg215">215</ref>.</l>
<l>Fontenelle le Ligueur, <ref target="Pg267">267</ref>.</l>
<l>Frérie Blanche, <ref target="Pg072">72</ref>.</l>
<l>Frobisher, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref>.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l>Gavr' Inis, <ref target="Pg174">174</ref>.</l>
<l>Gesril du Papeu, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref>, <ref target="Pg167">167</ref>.</l>
<l>Gilles de Bretagne, <ref target="Pg046">46</ref>.</l>
<l>Goëmon (wrack), <ref target="Pg094">94</ref>.</l>
<l>Grallo, King, <ref target="Pg139">139</ref>, <ref target="Pg275">275</ref>.</l>
<l>Guérande, <ref target="Pg245">245</ref>.</l>
<l>Guimiliau, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref>.</l>
<l>Granville, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref>.</l>
<l>Guingamp, <ref target="Pg072">72</ref>.</l>
<pb n="315"/><anchor id="Pg315"/>
</lg><lg>
<l>Hædic, Isle, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref>, <ref target="Pg257">257</ref>.</l>
<l>Haye du Puits, La, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref>.</l>
<l>Harcourt, G. d', <ref target="Pg015">15</ref>.</l>
<l>Hennebont, <ref target="Pg156">156</ref>.</l>
<l>Henry II., <ref target="Pg004">4</ref>, <ref target="Pg024">24</ref>, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref>.</l>
<l>Henry IV., <ref target="Pg071">71</ref>, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref>, <ref target="Pg191">191</ref>.</l>
<l>Henry V., <ref target="Pg013">13</ref>, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref>, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref>, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref>.</l>
<l>Henry VI., <ref target="Pg201">201</ref>.</l>
<l>Henry VII., <ref target="Pg201">201</ref>.</l>
<l>Henry VIII., <ref target="Pg128">128</ref>.</l>
<l>Henri IV., <ref target="Pg216">216</ref>, <ref target="Pg225">225</ref>.</l>
<l>Hercé, <ref target="Pg167">167</ref>, <ref target="Pg183">183</ref>.</l>
<l>Hoche, Gen., <ref target="Pg166">166</ref>.</l>
<l>Hunaudaye, Château de la, <ref target="Pg062">62</ref>.</l>
<l>Huelgoat, <ref target="Pg300">300</ref>.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l>Indian corn, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref>.</l>
<l>Inclined axis of church, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>.</l>
<l>Is, City of, <ref target="Pg274">274</ref>.</l>
<l>Ingrandes, <ref target="Pg217">217</ref>.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l>James II., <ref target="Pg072">72</ref>, <ref target="Pg205">205</ref>.</l>
<l>Jean de Montfort, <ref target="Pg067">67</ref>, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref>, <ref target="Pg153">153</ref>.</l>
<l>Jeanne d'Arc, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref>.</l>
<l>Jeanne de Flandre (Montfort), <ref target="Pg083">83</ref>, <ref target="Pg156">156</ref>.</l>
<l>Jeanne de France, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>, <ref target="Pg219">219</ref>.</l>
<l>Jeanne de Penthièvre, <ref target="Pg083">83</ref>.</l>
<l>Jeanne (Joan) of Navarre, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref>, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref>, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref>, <ref target="Pg246">246</ref>.</l>
<l>John I. (Roux), <ref target="Pg189">189</ref>, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref>.</l>
<l>John II., <ref target="Pg204">204</ref>.</l>
<l>John III. (Bon), <ref target="Pg067">67</ref>, <ref target="Pg160">160</ref>, <ref target="Pg205">205</ref>.</l>
<l>John IV. (Victorieux), <ref target="Pg025">25</ref>, <ref target="Pg067">67</ref>, <ref target="Pg071">71</ref>, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref>, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref>, <ref target="Pg160">160</ref>, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>, <ref target="Pg223">223</ref>, <ref target="Pg246">246</ref>.</l>
<l>John V., <ref target="Pg088">88</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref>, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>.</l>
<l>Josselin, Château, <ref target="Pg211">211</ref>.</l>
<l>Jugon, <ref target="Pg061">61</ref>, <ref target="Pg187">187</ref>.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l>Kergrist, Château, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref>.</l>
<l>Kermartin, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>.</l>
<l>Kermario, <ref target="Pg177">177</ref>.</l>
<l>Kersanton stone, <ref target="Pg122">122</ref>, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref>.</l>
<l>Kerserho, <ref target="Pg181">181</ref>.</l>
<l>Kerscaven, <ref target="Pg269">269</ref>.</l>
<l>Knights Templars, <ref target="Pg069">69</ref>.</l>
<l>Knollys, Sir R., <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>, <ref target="Pg143">143</ref>.</l>
<l>Korn-er-Hoët, <ref target="Pg187">187</ref>.</l>
<pb n="316"/><anchor id="Pg316"/>
<l>La Forêt, Bay, <ref target="Pg143">143</ref>.</l>
<l>La Garaye, Château of, <ref target="Pg057">57</ref>.</l>
<l>Lamballe, <ref target="Pg067">67</ref>.</l>
<l>Lanleff, <ref target="Pg068">68</ref>.</l>
<l>Langoat, <ref target="Pg083">83</ref>.</l>
<l>Langoustes, <ref target="Pg094">94</ref>, <ref target="Pg147">147</ref>.</l>
<l>Lannion, <ref target="Pg094">94</ref>.</l>
<l>Lanvaux, Lande de, <ref target="Pg187">187</ref>.</l>
<l>Larochejaquelin, <ref target="Pg022">22</ref>.</l>
<l>La Tour d'Auvergne, <ref target="Pg297">297</ref>.</l>
<l>Lehon Abbey, <ref target="Pg056">56</ref>.</l>
<l>Lavandières de la Nuit, <ref target="Pg290">290</ref>.</l>
<l>Lesage, <ref target="Pg188">188</ref>.</l>
<l>Léonnais, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>.</l>
<l>Léon, Viscounts, <ref target="Pg110">110</ref>.</l>
<l>Lézardrieux, <ref target="Pg080">80</ref>.</l>
<l>Lessay, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref>.</l>
<l>Locmariaker, <ref target="Pg170">170</ref>.</l>
<l>Loctudy, <ref target="Pg261">261</ref>.</l>
<l>Lorient, <ref target="Pg155">155</ref>.</l>
<l>Louis XI., <ref target="Pg026">26</ref>, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref>.</l>
<l>Louis XII., <ref target="Pg032">32</ref>, <ref target="Pg223">223</ref>.</l>
<l>Louis XIV., <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>, <ref target="Pg189">189</ref>.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l>Manny, Sir W., <ref target="Pg128">128</ref>, <ref target="Pg153">153</ref>, <ref target="Pg157">157</ref>.</l>
<l>Manoir, <ref target="Pg081">81</ref>.</l>
<l>Martinvast, <ref target="Pg012">12</ref>.</l>
<l>Matilda, Empress, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>.</l>
<l>Mary, daughter of Edward III., <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>.</l>
<l>Merc&oelig;ur, Duke de, <ref target="Pg225">225</ref>.</l>
<l>Menhir, <ref target="Pg035">35</ref>.</l>
<l>Mingant Rock, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>.</l>
<l>Minihy (sanctuaries), <ref target="Pg088">88</ref>.</l>
<l>Mivoie, Chêne de, <ref target="Pg207">207</ref>.</l>
<l>Montafilant, Château, <ref target="Pg046">46</ref>.</l>
<l>Montfort, <ref target="Pg215">215</ref>.</l>
<l>Mont St. Michel, <ref target="Pg025">25</ref>.</l>
<l>Motto of Dukes of Brittany, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref>, <ref target="Pg161">161</ref>.</l>
<l>Morbihan Sea, <ref target="Pg174">174</ref>.</l>
<l>Morlaix, <ref target="Pg097">97</ref>.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l>Nacqueville, Château, <ref target="Pg006">6</ref>.</l>
<l>Nantes, <ref target="Pg221">221</ref>.</l>
<l>Napoleon I., <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>, <ref target="Pg004">4</ref>.</l>
<l>Notre Dame-de-Comfort, church, <ref target="Pg279">279</ref>.</l>
<l>Notre Dame-du-Roncier, <ref target="Pg213">213</ref>.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l>Octeville, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>.</l>
<l>Ouëssant Isle, <ref target="Pg128">128</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref>.</l>
</lg><lg>
<pb n="317"/><anchor id="Pg317"/>
<l>Paimb&oelig;uf, <ref target="Pg229">229</ref>.</l>
<l>Paimpol, <ref target="Pg080">80</ref>.</l>
<l>Palais, Le, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref>.</l>
<l>Penmarch, <ref target="Pg263">263</ref>.</l>
<l>Penmarch, Torche de, <ref target="Pg262">262</ref>.</l>
<l>Penthièvre, <ref target="Pg149">149</ref>, <ref target="Pg210">210</ref>, <ref target="Pg225">225</ref>.</l>
<l>Périers, <ref target="Pg018">18</ref>.</l>
<l>Perros Guirec, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref>.</l>
<l>Peter, Duke, <ref target="Pg072">72</ref>.</l>
<l>Philip Augustus, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref>.</l>
<l>Pierre de Dreux, <ref target="Pg216">216</ref>.</l>
<l>Pierres de Croix, <ref target="Pg286">286</ref>.</l>
<l>Pleudaniel, <ref target="Pg081">81</ref>.</l>
<l>Ploërmel, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref>.</l>
<l>Plouaret, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref>.</l>
<l>Plougastel, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref>.</l>
<l>Plouharnel, <ref target="Pg180">180</ref>.</l>
<l>Ploumanach, <ref target="Pg092">92</ref>.</l>
<l>Pointe du Raz, <ref target="Pg271">271</ref>.</l>
<l>Pole, W. de la, Earl of Suffolk, <ref target="Pg013">13</ref>.</l>
<l>Pontacallec, Marquis de, <ref target="Pg226">226</ref>, <ref target="Pg294">294</ref>.</l>
<l>Pontaven, <ref target="Pg150">150</ref>.</l>
<l>Pontcroix, <ref target="Pg276">276</ref>.</l>
<l>Pont l'Abbé, <ref target="Pg257">257</ref>.</l>
<l>Pontorson, <ref target="Pg024">24</ref>.</l>
<l>Port Navalo, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref>.</l>
<l>Potatoes, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref>.</l>
<l>Poulignan, <ref target="Pg233">233</ref>.</l>
<l>Porzmoguer, <ref target="Pg130">130</ref>.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l>Querqueville, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>.</l>
<l>Quiberon, <ref target="Pg165">165</ref>.</l>
<l>Quimper, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref>.</l>
<l>Quimperlé, <ref target="Pg151">151</ref>.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l>Rance River, <ref target="Pg043">43</ref>.</l>
<l>Richelieu, Cardinal, <ref target="Pg096">96</ref>, <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>.</l>
<l>Richelieu, Duke, <ref target="Pg082">82</ref>.</l>
<l>Rennes, <ref target="Pg216">216</ref>.</l>
<l>Retz, Cardinal, <ref target="Pg226">226</ref>.</l>
<l>Rieux, Marshal, <ref target="Pg202">202</ref>.</l>
<l>River scenery, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>, <ref target="Pg216">216</ref>, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref>.</l>
<l>Roads, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>.</l>
<l>Roche Bernard, La, <ref target="Pg247">247</ref>.</l>
<l>Roche Derrien, La, <ref target="Pg082">82</ref>.</l>
<l>Roche Jagu, La, <ref target="Pg081">81</ref>.</l>
<l>Rochefort, Chancellor, <ref target="Pg229">229</ref>.</l>
<l>Rocking stones, <ref target="Pg093">93</ref>, <ref target="Pg149">149</ref>, <ref target="Pg300">300</ref>.</l>
<l>Rohan family, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref>, <ref target="Pg099">99</ref>, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>, <ref target="Pg210">210</ref>.</l>
<l>Rosaries, <ref target="Pg282">282</ref>.</l>
<pb n="318"/><anchor id="Pg318"/>
<l>Roscoff, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>.</l>
<l>Rosgrand, <ref target="Pg153">153</ref>.</l>
<l>Rosporden, <ref target="Pg285">285</ref>.</l>
<l>Rustéphan, Château, <ref target="Pg149">149</ref>.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l>Sacring bells, <ref target="Pg279">279</ref>.</l>
<l>Saire, Monk of, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>.</l>
<l>Ste. Anne la Palue, <ref target="Pg282">282</ref>.</l>
<l>St. Armal, <ref target="Pg204">204</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Aubin du Cormier, <ref target="Pg229">229</ref>.</l>
<l>Ste. Barbe, <ref target="Pg287">287</ref>.</l>
<l>St. Brieuc, <ref target="Pg071">71</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Corentin, <ref target="Pg137">137</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Cornély, <ref target="Pg178">178</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Fiacre, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash;  "  church, <ref target="Pg293">293</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Florent, <ref target="Pg217">217</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Génévroc, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Germain, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Gildas, <ref target="Pg192">192</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Guenolé, <ref target="Pg263">263</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Herbot, <ref target="Pg303">303</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Ives, <ref target="Pg085">85</ref>, <ref target="Pg088">88</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Léonard, <ref target="Pg075">75</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Malo, <ref target="Pg039">39</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Mathieu, <ref target="Pg129">129</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Michael, Order of, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Nazaire, <ref target="Pg230">230</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Pair, <ref target="Pg023">23</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Pol de Léon, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Samson, <ref target="Pg032">32</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Thégonnec, <ref target="Pg114">114</ref>, <ref target="Pg117">117</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Urlose, <ref target="Pg152">152</ref>.</l>
<l>&mdash; Vincente Ferrar, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref>.</l>
<l>Salt, <ref target="Pg233">233</ref>.</l>
<l>Sardine fishery, <ref target="Pg144">144</ref>.</l>
<l>Sarzeau, <ref target="Pg192">192</ref>.</l>
<l>Scaër, <ref target="Pg285">285</ref>.</l>
<l>Scales, Lord, <ref target="Pg021">21</ref>.</l>
<l>Sein, Isle, <ref target="Pg272">272</ref>.</l>
<pb n="319"/><anchor id="Pg319"/>
<l>Sevigné, Madame de, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref>.</l>
<l>Skull-boxes, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>.</l>
<l>S&oelig;urs de la Miséricorde, <ref target="Pg016">16</ref>.</l>
<l>S&oelig;urs de le Providence, <ref target="Pg011">11</ref>.</l>
<l>Sombreuil, Comte de, <ref target="Pg164">164</ref>, <ref target="Pg183">183</ref>, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref>.</l>
<l>Stuart, Charles, <ref target="Pg113">113</ref>, <ref target="Pg230">230</ref>.</l>
<l>Stuart, Mary, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref>, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref>.</l>
<l>Sucinio, Château, <ref target="Pg189">189</ref>.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l>Teigneuse, Isle, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref>.</l>
<l>Thomas à Becket, <ref target="Pg024">24</ref>.</l>
<l>Tocqueville, A. de, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref>.</l>
<l>Tombeleine, Isle, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref>.</l>
<l>Touquédec, Château, <ref target="Pg095">95</ref>.</l>
<l>Tourlaville, Château, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref>.</l>
<l>Tréguier, <ref target="Pg088">88</ref>.</l>
<l>Trégunc, <ref target="Pg149">149</ref>.</l>
<l>Trieux River, <ref target="Pg080">80</ref>.</l>
<l>Trinité, La, <ref target="Pg130">130</ref>.</l>
<l>Tumiac, Butte de, <ref target="Pg199">199</ref>.</l>
<l>Typhaine, the Lady, <ref target="Pg024">24</ref>, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref>, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref>.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l>Valognes, <ref target="Pg014">14</ref>.</l>
<l>Vannes, <ref target="Pg183">183</ref>.</l>
<l>Varades, <ref target="Pg217">217</ref>.</l>
<l>Vendean army, <ref target="Pg217">217</ref>.</l>
<l>Veneti, <ref target="Pg183">183</ref>.</l>
<l>Venus' ear, <ref target="Pg002">2</ref>.</l>
<l>Victoria, Queen, <ref target="Pg001">1</ref>, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>, <ref target="Pg014">14</ref>.</l>
</lg><lg>
<l>Walsh, <ref target="Pg230">230</ref>.</l>
<l>War of the two Jeannes, <ref target="Pg083">83</ref>.</l>
<l>War of Succession, <ref target="Pg067">67</ref> <hi rend="italic">note</hi>.</l>
<l>Washing, <ref target="Pg018">18</ref>.</l>
<l>Wells, holy, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref>, <ref target="Pg285">285</ref>.</l>
<l>Welsh Baptists, <ref target="Pg100">100</ref>.</l>
<l>William the Conqueror, <ref target="Pg004">4</ref>.</l>
</lg></lg>
</div>
<pb n="320"/><anchor id="Pg320"/>


  </body>

  <back>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>Transcribers' Notes</head>
<p>The following substitutions were applied to the text by
Project Gutenberg proofers and transcribers&mdash;</p>
<lg><l>On page <ref target="Pg007">7</ref>: "recals" &mdash;&gt; "recalls"</l>
<l>On page <ref target="Pg025">25</ref>: "John IV Duke of Britanny" &mdash;&gt; "Brittany"</l>
<l>On page <ref target="Pg093">93</ref>: "slighest" &mdash;&gt; "slightest"</l>
<l>On page <ref target="Pg104">104</ref>: "calvarys" &mdash;&gt; "calvaries"</l>
<l>In Ill. 22: "Creisker" &mdash;&gt; "Creizker"</l>
<l>On page <ref target="Pg144">144</ref>: "mackarel" &mdash;&gt; "mackerel"</l>
<l>On page <ref target="Pg149">149</ref>: "out out" &mdash;&gt; "out"</l>
<l>On page <ref target="Pg167">167</ref>: twice "d'Angoulme" &mdash;&gt; "d'Angoulême"</l>
<l>On page <ref target="Pg178">178</ref>: "Erdevan" &mdash;&gt; "Erdeven"</l>
<l>On pages <ref target="Pg196">196</ref>/<ref target="Pg197">197</ref>: several extra double quotes removed</l>
<l>On page <ref target="Pg212">212</ref>: "ballustrades" &mdash;&gt; "balustrades"</l>
<l>On page <ref target="Pg270">270</ref>: "promonotory" &mdash;&gt; "promontory"</l>
<l>On page <ref target="Pg272">272</ref>: "corronation" &mdash;&gt; "coronation"</l>
<l>On page <ref target="Pg303">303</ref>: "in in" &mdash;&gt; "in"</l></lg>
</div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: right">
      <divGen type="pgfooter" />
    </div>

  </back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
